1  The United State's of America (commonly referred to as the United States, the U.S., the USA, or America) is a federal constitutional republic comprising fifty states and a federal district. The country is situated mostly in central North America, where its forty-eight contiguous states and Washington, D.C., the capital district, lie between the Pacific and Atlantic Oceans, bordered by Canada to the north and Mexico to the south. The state of Alaska is in the northwest of the continent, with Canada to its east and Russia to the west across the Bering Strait. The state of Hawaii is an archipelago in the mid-Pacific. The country also possesses several territories, or insular areas, in the Caribbean and Pacific.
 2  At 3.79 million square miles (9.83 million km?) and with about 306 million people, the United States is the third or fourth largest country by total area, and third largest by land area and by population. The United States is one of the world's most ethnically diverse and multicultural nations, the product of large-scale immigration from many countries.[7] The U.S. economy is the largest national economy in the world, with an estimated 2008 gross domestic product (GDP) of US $14.3 trillion (23% of the world total based on nominal GDP and almost 21% at purchasing power parity).[4][8]
 3  The nation was founded by thirteen colonies of Great Britain located along the Atlantic seaboard. On July 4, 1776, they issued the Declaration of Independence, which proclaimed their independence from Great Britain and their formation of a cooperative union. The rebellious states defeated Great Britain in the American Revolutionary War, the first successful colonial war of independence.[9] The Philadelphia Convention adopted the current United States Constitution on September 17, 1787; its ratification the following year made the states part of a single republic with a strong central government. The Bill of Rights, comprising ten constitutional amendments guaranteeing many fundamental civil rights and freedoms, was ratified in 1791.
 4  In 1507, German cartographer Martin Waldseem?ller produced a world map on which he named the lands of the Western Hemisphere "America" after Italian explorer and cartographer Amerigo Vespucci.[12] The former British colonies first used the country's modern name in the Declaration of Independence, which was the "unanimous Declaration of the thirteen united States of America" adopted by the "Representatives of the united States of America" on July 4, 1776.[13] The current name was finalized on November 15, 1777, when the Second Continental Congress adopted the Articles of Confederation, the first of which states, "The Stile of this Confederacy shall be 'The United States of America.'" The short form United States is also standard. Other common forms include the U.S., the USA, and America. Colloquial names include the U.S. of A. and the States. Columbia, a once popular name for the United States, was derived from Christopher Columbus. It appears in the name "District of Columbia".
 5  The standard way to refer to a citizen of the United States is as an American. Though United States is the formal adjective, American and U.S. are the most common adjectives used to refer to the country ("American values," "U.S. forces"). American is rarely used in English to refer to people not connected to the United States.[14]
 7  The total land area of the contiguous United States is approximately 1.9 billion acres. Alaska, separated from the contiguous United States by Canada, is the largest state at 365 million acres. Hawaii, occupying an archipelago in the central Pacific, southwest of North America, has just over 4 million acres.[16] After Russia and Canada, the United States is the world's third or fourth largest nation by total area, ranking just above or below China. The ranking varies depending on how two territories disputed by China and India are counted and how the total size of the United States is calculated: the CIA World Factbook gives 3,794,083 sq mi (9,826,630 km2),[1] the United Nations Statistics Division gives 3,717,813 sq mi (9,629,091 km2),[17] and the Encyclopedia Britannica gives 3,676,486 sq mi (9,522,055 km2).[18] Including only land area, the United States is third in size behind Russia and China, just ahead of Canada.[19]
 8  of the Midwest. The Mississippi֍issouri River, the world's fourth longest river system, runs mainly northֳouth through the heart of the country. The flat, fertile prairie of the Great Plains stretches to the west, interrupted by a highland region in the southeast. The Rocky Mountains, at the western edge of the Great Plains, extend north to south across the country, reaching altitudes higher than 14,000 feet (4,300 m) in Colorado. Farther west are the rocky Great Basin and deserts such as the Mojave. The Sierra Nevada and Cascade mountain ranges run close to the Pacific coast. At 20,320 feet (6,194 m), Alaska's Mount McKinley is the country's tallest peak. Active volcanoes are common throughout Alaska's Alexander and Aleutian Islands, and Hawaii consists of volcanic islands. The supervolcano underlying Yellowstone National Park in the Rockies is the continent's largest volcanic feature.[20]
 9  The United States, with its large size and geographic variety, includes most climate types. To the east of the 100th meridian, the climate ranges from humid continental in the north to humid subtropical in the south. The southern tip of Florida is tropical, as is Hawaii. The Great Plains west of the 100th meridian are semi-arid. Much of the Western mountains are alpine. The climate is arid in the Great Basin, desert in the Southwest, Mediterranean in coastal California, and oceanic in coastal Oregon and Washington and southern Alaska. Most of Alaska is subarctic or polar. Extreme weather is not uncommon״he states bordering the Gulf of Mexico are prone to hurricanes, and most of the world's tornadoes occur within the country, mainly in the Midwest's Tornado Alley.[21]
10  The U.S. ecology is considered "megadiverse": about 17,000 species of vascular plants occur in the contiguous United States and Alaska, and over 1,800 species of flowering plants are found in Hawaii, few of which occur on the mainland.[22] The United States is home to more than 400 mammal, 750 bird, and 500 reptile and amphibian species.[23] About 91,000 insect species have been described.[24] The Endangered Species Act of 1973 protects threatened and endangered species and their habitats, which are monitored by the United States Fish and Wildlife Service. There are fifty-eight national parks and hundreds of other federally managed parks, forests, and wilderness areas.[25] Altogether, the government owns 28.8% of the country's land area.[26] Most of this is protected, though some is leased for oil and gas drilling, mining, logging, or cattle ranching; 2.4% is used for military purposes.[26]
11  The indigenous peoples of the U.S. mainland, including Alaska Natives, migrated from Asia. They began arriving at least 12,000 and as many as 40,000 years ago.[27] Some, such as the pre-Columbian Mississippian culture, developed advanced agriculture, grand architecture, and state-level societies. After Europeans began settling the Americas, many millions of indigenous Americans died from epidemics of imported diseases such as smallpox.[28]
12  In 1492, Genoese explorer Christopher Columbus, under contract to the Spanish crown, reached several Caribbean islands, making first contact with the indigenous people. On April 2, 1513, Spanish conquistador Juan Ponce de Le?n landed on what he called "La Florida"״he first documented European arrival on what would become the U.S. mainland. Spanish settlements in the region were followed by ones in the present-day southwestern United States that drew thousands through Mexico. French fur traders established outposts of New France around the Great Lakes; France eventually claimed much of the North American interior, down to the Gulf of Mexico. The first successful English settlements were the Virginia Colony in Jamestown in 1607 and the Pilgrims' Plymouth Colony in 1620. The 1628 chartering of the Massachusetts Bay Colony resulted in a wave of migration; by 1634, New England had been settled by some 10,000 Puritans. Between the late 1610s and the American Revolution, about 50,000 convicts were shipped to Britain's American colonies.[29] Beginning in 1614, the Dutch settled along the lower Hudson River, including New Amsterdam on Manhattan Island.
13  In 1674, the Dutch ceded their American territory to England; the province of New Netherland was renamed New York. Many new immigrants, especially to the South, were indentured servants׳ome two-thirds of all Virginia immigrants between 1630 and 1680.[30] By the turn of the century, African slaves were becoming the primary source of bonded labor. With the 1729 division of the Carolinas and the 1732 colonization of Georgia, the thirteen British colonies that would become the United States of America were established. All had local governments with elections open to most free men, with a growing devotion to the ancient rights of Englishmen and a sense of self-government stimulating support for republicanism. All legalized the African slave trade. With high birth rates, low death rates, and steady immigration, the colonial population grew rapidly. The Christian revivalist movement of the 1730s and 1740s known as the Great Awakening fueled interest in both religion and religious liberty. In the French and Indian War, British forces seized Canada from the French, but the francophone population remained politically isolated from the southern colonies. Excluding the Native Americans (popularly known as "American Indians"), who were being displaced, those thirteen colonies had a population of 2.6 million in 1770, about one-third that of Britain; nearly one in five Americans were black slaves.[31] Though subject to British taxation, the American colonials had no representation in the Parliament of Great Britain.
14  Tensions between American colonials and the British during the revolutionary period of the 1760s and early 1770s led to the American Revolutionary War, fought from 1775 through 1781. On June 14, 1775, the Continental Congress, convening in Philadelphia, established a Continental Army under the command of George Washington. Proclaiming that "all men are created equal" and endowed with "certain unalienable Rights," the Congress adopted the Declaration of Independence, drafted largely by Thomas Jefferson, on July 4, 1776. That date is now celebrated annually as America's Independence Day. In 1777, the Articles of Confederation established a weak federal government that operated until 1789.
15  After the British defeat by American forces assisted by the French, Great Britain recognized the independence of the United States and the states' sovereignty over American territory west to the Mississippi River. A constitutional convention was organized in 1787 by those wishing to establish a strong national government, with powers of taxation. The United States Constitution was ratified in 1788, and the new republic's first Senate, House of Representatives, and presidentׇeorge Washington״ook office in 1789. The Bill of Rights, forbidding federal restriction of personal freedoms and guaranteeing a range of legal protections, was adopted in 1791.
16  Attitudes toward slavery were shifting; a clause in the Constitution protected the African slave trade only until 1808. The Northern states abolished slavery between 1780 and 1804, leaving the slave states of the South as defenders of the "peculiar institution." The Second Great Awakening, beginning about 1800, made evangelicalism a force behind various social reform movements, including abolitionism.
17  Americans' eagerness to expand westward prompted a long series of Indian Wars and an Indian removal policy that stripped the native peoples of their land. The Louisiana Purchase of French-claimed territory under President Thomas Jefferson in 1803 almost doubled the nation's size. The War of 1812, declared against Britain over various grievances and fought to a draw, strengthened U.S. nationalism. A series of U.S. military incursions into Florida led Spain to cede it and other Gulf Coast territory in 1819. The United States annexed the Republic of Texas in 1845. The concept of Manifest Destiny was popularized during this time.[32] The 1846 Oregon Treaty with Britain led to U.S. control of the present-day American Northwest. The U.S. victory in the Mexican-American War resulted in the 1848 cession of California and much of the present-day American Southwest. The California Gold Rush of 1848–49 further spurred western migration. New railways made relocation easier for settlers and increased conflicts with Native Americans. Over a half-century, up to 40 million American bison, or buffalo, were slaughtered for skins and meat and to ease the railways' spread. The loss of the buffalo, a primary resource for the plains Indians, was an existential blow to many native cultures.
18  Tensions between slave and free states mounted with arguments over the relationship between the state and federal governments, as well as violent conflicts over the spread of slavery into new states. Abraham Lincoln, candidate of the largely antislavery Republican Party, was elected president in 1860. Before he took office, seven slave states declared their secession—which the federal government maintained was illegal—and formed the Confederate States of America. With the Confederate attack upon Fort Sumter, the American Civil War began and four more slave states joined the Confederacy. Lincoln's Emancipation Proclamation committed the Union to ending slavery. Following the Union victory in 1865, three amendments to the U.S. Constitution ensured freedom for the nearly four million African Americans who had been slaves,[33] made them citizens, and gave them voting rights. The war and its resolution led to a substantial increase in federal power.[34]
19  After the war, the assassination of Lincoln radicalized Republican Reconstruction policies aimed at reintegrating and rebuilding the Southern states while ensuring the rights of the newly freed slaves. The resolution of the disputed 1876 presidential election by the Compromise of 1877 ended Reconstruction; Jim Crow laws soon disenfranchised many African Americans. In the North, urbanization and an unprecedented influx of immigrants from Southern and Eastern Europe hastened the country's industrialization. The wave of immigration, lasting until 1929, provided labor and transformed American culture. High tariff protections, national infrastructure building, and new banking regulations encouraged growth. The 1867 Alaska purchase from Russia completed the country's mainland expansion. The Wounded Knee massacre in 1890 was the last major armed conflict of the Indian Wars. In 1893, the indigenous monarchy of the Pacific Kingdom of Hawaii was overthrown in a coup led by American residents; the United States annexed the archipelago in 1898. Victory in the Spanish-American War the same year demonstrated that the United States was a world power and led to the annexation of Puerto Rico, Guam, and the Philippines. The Philippines gained independence a half-century later; Puerto Rico and Guam remain U.S. territories.
20  At the outbreak of World War I in 1914, the United States remained neutral. Most Americans sympathized with the British and French, although many opposed intervention.[35] In 1917, the United States joined the Allies, turning the tide against the Central Powers. After the war, the Senate did not ratify the Treaty of Versailles, which established the League of Nations. The country pursued a policy of unilateralism, verging on isolationism.[36] In 1920, the women's rights movement won passage of a constitutional amendment granting women's suffrage. The prosperity of the Roaring Twenties ended with the Wall Street Crash of 1929 that triggered the Great Depression. After his election as president in 1932, Franklin D. Roosevelt responded with the New Deal, a range of policies increasing government intervention in the economy. The Dust Bowl of the mid-1930s impoverished many farming communities and spurred a new wave of western migration.
21  The United States, effectively neutral during World War II's early stages after Nazi Germany's invasion of Poland in September 1939, began supplying materiel to the Allies in March 1941 through the Lend-Lease program. On December 7, 1941, the United States joined the Allies against the Axis powers after a surprise attack on Pearl Harbor by Japan. World War II cost far more money than any other war in American history,[37] but it boosted the economy by providing capital investment and jobs. Among the major combatants, the United States was the only nation to become richer—indeed, far richer—instead of poorer because of the war.[38] Allied conferences at Bretton Woods and Yalta outlined a new system of international organizations that placed the United States and Soviet Union at the center of world affairs. As victory was won in Europe, a 1945 international conference held in San Francisco produced the United Nations Charter, which became active after the war.[39] The United States, having developed the first nuclear weapons, used them on the Japanese cities of Hiroshima and Nagasaki in August. Japan surrendered on September 2, ending the war.[40]
22  The United States and Soviet Union jockeyed for power after World War II during the Cold War, dominating the military affairs of Europe through NATO and the Warsaw Pact. The United States promoted liberal democracy and capitalism, while the Soviet Union promoted communism and a centrally planned economy. Both supported dictatorships and engaged in proxy wars. American troops fought Communist Chinese forces in the Korean War of 1950–53. The House Un-American Activities Committee pursued a series of investigations into suspected leftist subversion, while Senator Joseph McCarthy became the figurehead of anticommunist sentiment.
23  The 1961 Soviet launch of the first manned spaceflight prompted President John F. Kennedy's call for the United States to be first to land "a man on the moon," achieved in 1969. Kennedy also faced a tense nuclear showdown with Soviet forces in Cuba. Meanwhile, the United States experienced sustained economic expansion. A growing civil rights movement, led by African Americans such as Rosa Parks and Martin Luther King, Jr., fought segregation and discrimination. Following Kennedy's assassination in 1963, the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and Voting Rights Act of 1965 were passed under President Lyndon B. Johnson. Johnson and his successor, Richard Nixon, expanded a proxy war in Southeast Asia into the unsuccessful Vietnam War. A widespread countercultural movement grew, fueled by opposition to the war, black nationalism, and the sexual revolution. Betty Friedan, Gloria Steinem, and others led a new wave of feminism that sought political, social, and economic equality for women.
24  As a result of the Watergate scandal, in 1974 Nixon became the first U.S. president to resign, rather than be impeached on charges including obstruction of justice and abuse of power; he was succeeded by Vice President Gerald Ford. The Jimmy Carter administration of the late 1970s was marked by stagflation and the Iran hostage crisis. The election of Ronald Reagan as president in 1980 heralded a significant rightward shift in American politics, reflected in major changes in taxation and spending priorities. His second term in office brought both the Iran-Contra scandal and significant diplomatic progress with the Soviet Union. The subsequent Soviet collapse ended the Cold War.
25  The leadership role taken by the United States and its allies in the UN–sanctioned Gulf War, under President George H. W. Bush, and the Yugoslav wars, under President Bill Clinton, helped to preserve its position as a superpower. The longest economic expansion in modern U.S. history—from March 1991 to March 2001—encompassed the Clinton administration and the dot-com bubble.[41] A civil lawsuit and sex scandal led to Clinton's impeachment in 1998, but he remained in office. The 2000 presidential election, one of the closest in U.S. history, was resolved by a U.S. Supreme Court decision—George W. Bush, son of George H. W. Bush, became president.
26  On September 11, 2001, al-Qaeda terrorists struck the World Trade Center in New York City and The Pentagon near Washington, D.C., killing nearly three thousand people. In response, the Bush administration launched a "War on Terrorism". In late 2001, U.S. forces led an invasion of Afghanistan, removing the Taliban government and al-Qaeda training camps. Taliban insurgents continue to fight a guerrilla war. In 2002, the Bush administration began to press for regime change in Iraq on controversial grounds.[42] Lacking the support of NATO or an explicit UN mandate for military intervention, Bush organized a Coalition of the Willing; coalition forces preemptively invaded Iraq in 2003, removing dictator and former U.S. ally Saddam Hussein. Amnesty International has accused the United States of human rights violations in its pursuit of the War on Terrorism and the Iraq War.[43] In 2005, Hurricane Katrina caused severe destruction along much of the Gulf Coast, devastating New Orleans. On November 4, 2008, amid a global economic recession, Barack Obama was elected president. He is the first African American to hold the office.
27  The United States is the world's oldest surviving federation. It is a constitutional republic, "in which majority rule is tempered by minority rights protected by law."[44] It is fundamentally structured as a representative democracy, though U.S. citizens residing in the territories are excluded from voting for federal officials.[45] The government is regulated by a system of checks and balances defined by the U.S. Constitution, which serves as the country's supreme legal document. In the American federalist system, citizens are usually subject to three levels of government, federal, state, and local; the local government's duties are commonly split between county and municipal governments. In almost all cases, executive and legislative officials are elected by a plurality vote of citizens by district. There is no proportional representation at the federal level, and it is very rare at lower levels. Federal and state judicial and cabinet officials are typically nominated by the executive branch and approved by the legislature, although some state judges and officials are elected by popular vote.
29  The federal government is composed of three branches:
30  Legislative: The bicameral Congress, made up of the Senate and the House of Representatives, makes federal law, declares war, approves treaties, has the power of the purse, and has the power of impeachment, by which it can remove sitting members of the government.
31  Executive: The president is the commander-in-chief of the military, can veto legislative bills before they become law, and appoints the Cabinet and other officers, who administer and enforce federal laws and policies.
32  Judicial: The Supreme Court and lower federal courts, whose judges are appointed by the president with Senate approval, interpret laws and can overturn laws they find unconstitutional.
33  The House of Representatives has 435 members, each representing a congressional district for a two-year term. House seats are apportioned among the states by population every tenth year. As of the 2000 census, seven states have the minimum of one representative, while California, the most populous state, has fifty-three. The Senate has 100 members with each state having two senators, elected at-large to six-year terms; one third of Senate seats are up for election every other year. The president serves a four-year term and may be elected to the office no more than twice. The president is not elected by direct vote, but by an indirect electoral college system in which the determining votes are apportioned by state. The Supreme Court, led by the Chief Justice of the United States, has nine members, who serve for life. The state governments are structured in roughly similar fashion; Nebraska uniquely has a unicameral legislature. The governor (chief executive) of each state is directly elected.
34  All laws and procedures of both state and federal governments are subject to review, and any law ruled in violation of the Constitution by the judiciary is voided. The original text of the Constitution establishes the structure and responsibilities of the federal government and its relationship with the individual states. Article One protects the right to the "great writ" of habeas corpus, and Article Three guarantees the right to a jury trial in all criminal cases. Amendments to the Constitution require the approval of three-fourths of the states. The Constitution has been amended twenty-seven times; the first ten amendments, which make up the Bill of Rights, and the Fourteenth Amendment form the central basis of Americans' individual rights.
35  The United States has operated under a two-party system for most of its history. For elective offices at all levels, state-administered primary elections choose the major party nominees for subsequent general elections. Since the general election of 1856, the major parties have been the Democratic Party, founded in 1824, and the Republican Party, founded in 1854. Since the Civil War, only one third-party presidential candidate—former president Theodore Roosevelt, running as a Progressive in 1912—has won as much as 20% of the popular vote.
36  Within American political culture, the Republican Party is considered center-right or "conservative" and the Democratic Party is considered center-left or "liberal". The states of the Northeast and West Coast and some of the Great Lakes states, known as "blue states", are relatively liberal. The "red states" of the South and much of the Great Plains and Rocky Mountains are relatively conservative.
37  The winner of the 2008 presidential election, Democrat Barack Obama, is the 44th U.S. president and the first African American to hold the office. All previous presidents were men of solely European descent. The 2008 elections also saw the Democratic Party strengthen its control of both the House and the Senate. In the 111th United States Congress, the Senate comprises 56 Democrats, two independents who caucus with the Democrats, and 41 Republicans (one seat remains in dispute); the House comprises 254 Democrats and 178 Republicans (three seats are vacant).
38  The United States is a federal union of fifty states. The original thirteen states were the successors of the thirteen colonies that rebelled against British rule. Most of the rest have been carved from territory obtained through war or purchase by the U.S. government. One set of exceptions comprises Vermont, Texas, and Hawaii: each was an independent republic before joining the union. Another set of exceptions comprises those states created out of the territory of the original thirteen. Early in the country's history, three states were created in this manner: Kentucky from Virginia; Tennessee from North Carolina; and Maine from Massachusetts. During the American Civil War, West Virginia broke away from Virginia. The most recent state—Hawaii—achieved statehood on August 21, 1959. The states do not have the right to secede from the union.
39  The states compose the vast bulk of the U.S. land mass; the two other areas considered integral parts of the country are the District of Columbia, the federal district where the capital, Washington, is located; and Palmyra Atoll, an uninhabited but incorporated territory in the Pacific Ocean. The United States also possesses five major overseas territories: Puerto Rico and the United States Virgin Islands in the Caribbean; and American Samoa, Guam, and the Northern Mariana Islands in the Pacific. Those born in the territories (except for American Samoa) possess U.S. citizenship.
40  The United States exercises global economic, political, and military influence. It is a permanent member of the United Nations Security Council and New York City hosts the United Nations Headquarters. Almost all countries have embassies in Washington, D.C., and many host consulates around the country. Likewise, nearly all nations host American diplomatic missions. However, Cuba, Iran, North Korea, Bhutan, Sudan, and the Republic of China (Taiwan) do not have formal diplomatic relations with the United States.
41  The United States enjoys a special relationship with the United Kingdom and strong ties with Australia, New Zealand, Japan, Israel, and fellow NATO members. It also works closely with its neighbors through the Organization of American States and free trade agreements such as the trilateral North American Free Trade Agreement with Canada and Mexico. In 2005, the United States spent $27 billion on official development assistance, the most in the world. However, as a share of gross national income (GNI), the U.S. contribution of 0.22% ranked twentieth of twenty-two donor states. Nongovernmental sources such as private foundations, corporations, and educational and religious institutions donated $96 billion. The combined total of $123 billion is also the most in the world and seventh as a percentage of GNI.[46]
42  The president holds the title of commander-in-chief of the nation's armed forces and appoints its leaders, the secretary of defense and the Joint Chiefs of Staff. The United States Department of Defense administers the armed forces, including the Army, Navy, Marine Corps, and Air Force. The Coast Guard is run by the Department of Homeland Security in peacetime and the Department of the Navy in time of war. In 2005, the military had 1.38 million personnel on active duty,[47] along with several hundred thousand each in the Reserves and the National Guard for a total of 2.3 million troops. The Department of Defense also employs about 700,000 civilians, not including contractors. Military service is voluntary, though conscription may occur in wartime through the Selective Service System. American forces can be rapidly deployed by the Air Force's large fleet of transport aircraft and aerial refueling tankers, the Navy's fleet of eleven active aircraft carriers, and Marine Expeditionary Units at sea in the Navy's Atlantic and Pacific fleets. Outside of the United States, the military is deployed to 770 bases and facilities, on every continent except Antarctica.[48] The extent of this global military presence has prompted some scholars to describe the United States as maintaining an "empire of bases."[49]
43  Total U.S. military spending in 2006, over $528 billion, was 46% of global military spending and greater than the next fourteen largest national military expenditures combined. (In purchasing power parity terms, it was larger than the next six such expenditures combined.) The per capita spending of $1,756 was about ten times the world average.[50] At 4.06% of GDP, U.S. military spending is ranked 27th out of 172 nations.[51] The proposed base Department of Defense budget for 2009, $515.4 billion, is a 7% increase over 2008 and a nearly 74% increase over 2001.[52] The cost of the Iraq War to the United States has been estimated to reach $2.7 trillion.[53] As of March 10, 2009, the United States had suffered 4,257 military fatalities during the war and over 31,000 wounded.[54]
44  The United States has a capitalist mixed economy, which is fueled by abundant natural resources, a well-developed infrastructure, and high productivity.[60] According to the International Monetary Fund, the U.S. GDP of $14.3 trillion constitutes 23% of the gross world product at market exchange rates and almost 21% of the gross world product at purchasing power parity (PPP).[4] The largest national GDP in the world, it was about 4% less than the combined GDP of the European Union at PPP in 2007.[61] The country ranks seventeenth in the world in nominal GDP per capita and sixth in GDP per capita at PPP.[4] The United States is the largest importer of goods and third largest exporter, though exports per capita are relatively low. Canada, China, Mexico, Japan, and Germany are its top trading partners.[62] The leading export commodity is electrical machinery, while vehicles constitute the leading import.[63] The United States tops the overall ranking in the Global Competitiveness Report.[64] After an expansion that lasted just over six years, the U.S. economy has been in recession since December 2007.[65]
45  The private sector constitutes the bulk of the economy, with government activity accounting for 12.4% of GDP. The economy is postindustrial, with the service sector contributing 67.8% of GDP.[66] The leading business field by gross business receipts is wholesale and retail trade; by net income it is finance and insurance.[67] The United States remains an industrial power, with chemical products the leading manufacturing field.[68] The United States is the third largest producer of oil in the world, as well as its largest importer.[69] It is the world's number one producer of electrical and nuclear energy, as well as liquid natural gas, sulfur, phosphates, and salt. While agriculture accounts for just under 1% of GDP,[66] the United States is the world's top producer of corn[70] and soybeans.[71] The New York Stock Exchange is the world's largest by dollar volume.[72] Coca-Cola and McDonald's are the two most recognized brands in the world.[73]
46  In 2005, 155 million persons were employed with earnings, of whom 80% had full-time jobs.[74] The majority, 79%, were employed in the service sector.[1] With about 15.5 million people, health care and social assistance is the leading field of employment.[75] About 12% of workers are unionized, compared to 30% in Western Europe.[76] The World Bank ranks the United States first in the ease of hiring and firing workers.[77] Between 1973 and 2003, a year's work for the average American grew by 199 hours.[78] Partly as a result, the United States maintains the highest labor productivity in the world. However, it no longer leads in productivity per hour as it did from the 1950s through the early 1990s; workers in Norway, France, Belgium, and Luxembourg are now more productive per hour.[79] Compared to Europe, U.S. property and corporate income tax rates are generally higher, while labor and, particularly, consumption tax rates are lower.[80]
47  According to the United States Census Bureau, the pretax median household income in 2007 was $50,233. The median ranged from $68,080 in Maryland to $36,338 in Mississippi.[59] Using purchasing power parity exchange rates, the overall median is similar to the most affluent cluster of developed nations. After declining sharply during the middle of the 20th century, poverty rates have plateaued since the early 1970s, with 11–15% of Americans below the poverty line every year, and 58.5% spending at least one year in poverty between the ages of 25 and 75.[5][82] In 2007, 37.3 million Americans lived in poverty.[59] The U.S. welfare state is now among the most austere in the developed world, reducing both relative poverty and absolute poverty by considerably less than the mean for rich nations.[83][84] While the American welfare state does well in reducing poverty among the elderly,[85] the young receive relatively little assistance.[86] A 2007 UNICEF study of children's well-being in twenty-one industrialized nations ranked the United States next to last.[87]
48  Despite strong increases in productivity, low unemployment, and low inflation, income gains since 1980 have been slower than in previous decades, less widely shared, and accompanied by increased economic insecurity. Between 1947 and 1979, real median income rose by over 80% for all classes, with the incomes of poor Americans rising faster than those of the rich.[88][89] Median household income has increased for all classes since 1980,[90] largely owing to more dual-earner households, the closing of the gender gap, and longer work hours, but growth has been slower and strongly tilted toward the very top (see graph).[83][88][91] Consequently, the share of income of the top 1%—21.8% of total reported income in 2005—has more than doubled since 1980,[92] leaving the United States with the greatest income inequality among developed nations.[83][93] The top 1% pays 27.6% of all federal taxes; the top 10% pays 54.7%.[94] Wealth, like income, is highly concentrated: The richest 10% of the adult population possesses 69.8% of the country's household wealth, the second-highest share among developed nations.[95] The top 1% possesses 33.4% of net wealth.[96]
49  The United States has been a leader in scientific research and technological innovation since the late 19th century. In 1876, Alexander Graham Bell was awarded the first U.S. patent for the telephone. Thomas Edison's laboratory developed the phonograph, the first long-lasting light bulb, and the first viable movie camera. Nikola Tesla pioneered alternating current, the AC motor, and radio. In the early 20th century, the automobile companies of Ransom E. Olds and Henry Ford promoted the assembly line. The Wright brothers, in 1903, made the first sustained and controlled heavier-than-air powered flight.[97] The rise of Nazism in the 1930s led many European scientists, including Albert Einstein and Enrico Fermi, to immigrate to the United States. During World War II, the Manhattan Project developed nuclear weapons, ushering in the Atomic Age. The Space Race produced rapid advances in rocketry, materials science, and computers. The United States largely developed the ARPANET and its successor, the Internet. Today, the bulk of research and development funding, 64%, comes from the private sector.[98] The United States leads the world in scientific research papers and impact factor.[99] Americans possess high levels of technological consumer goods,[100] and almost half of U.S. households have broadband Internet access.[101] The country is the primary developer and grower of genetically modified food; more than half of the world's land planted with biotech crops is in the United States.[102]
50  As of 2003, there were 759 automobiles per 1,000 Americans, compared to 472 per 1,000 inhabitants of the European Union the following year.[104] About 40% of personal vehicles are vans, SUVs, or light trucks.[105] The average American adult (accounting for all drivers and nondrivers) spends 55 minutes driving every day, traveling 29 miles (47 km).[106] The U.S. intercity passenger rail system is relatively weak.[107] Only 9% of total U.S. work trips use mass transit, compared to 38.8% in Europe.[108] Bicycle usage is minimal, well below European levels.[109] The civil airline industry is entirely privatized, while most major airports are publicly owned. The five largest airlines in the world by passengers carried are American: American Airlines is number one.[110] Of the world's thirty busiest passenger airports, sixteen are in the United States, including the busiest, Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport (ATL).[111]
51  Die Vereinigten Staaten von Amerika (kurz USA), die in amtlicher Kurzform Vereinigte Staaten, nichtamtlich auch Amerika (englisch America), sind eine Bundesrepublik in Nordamerika, die 50 Bundesstaaten umfasst. Mit dem Bundesstaat Hawaii und kleineren Außengebieten haben sie auch Anteil an Ozeanien.
52  Das Land umfasst etwa 40 Prozent des Gebietes Nordamerikas und ist flächenmäßig nach Russland und Kanada der drittgrößte Staat der Erde.
53  Die Besiedlung durch Indianer begann vor über 14.000 Jahren, in Alaska möglicherweise noch früher. Um 1500 landeten Europäer an der Ostküste und begannen nach 1600 mit der Kolonialisierung. Dabei setzten sich die Engländer gegen Schweden, Niederländer und Franzosen durch. Frankreich trat 1763 seine Kolonie Neufrankreich an Großbritannien ab, Spanien gab Florida auf.
54  Die Vereinigten Staaten gingen aus den dreizehn britischen Kolonien hervor, die sich 1776 vom Mutterland Großbritannien unabhängig erklärten. Durch stete Einwanderung aus Europa, Abdrängung der Ureinwohner in Reservate (reservations), territoriale Expansion nach Westen, Annexion großer Teile Mexikos, wie etwa Kalifornien, und Industrialisierung gewannen die USA gegen Ende des 19. und vor allem im 20. Jahrhundert an weltpolitischem Einfluss. Dies zeigte sich insbesondere in den beiden Weltkriegen. Am Ende des 20. Jahrhunderts waren die Vereinigten Staaten nach dem Zerfall der Sowjetunion die einzige verbliebene Supermacht.
55  Eine formale Amtssprache gibt es nicht, doch herrscht Englisch bei Weitem vor, im Südwesten ist Spanisch verbreitet. Daneben existiert eine Vielzahl von Einwanderersprachen sowie Überreste der zahlreichen Indianersprachen.
56  Die USA haben eine gemeinsame Grenze mit Kanada, die insgesamt 8.895 km lang ist (wobei sich allein 2.477 km zwischen Alaska und Kanada erstrecken), und eine mit Mexiko, die 3.326 km lang ist. Die Küstenlinie an Atlantik, Pazifik und Golf von Mexiko umfasst insgesamt 19.924 km.
57  Der Staat umfasst eine Landfläche von 9.161.924 km², hinzu kommen 664.706 km²[3] Wasserflächen, so dass sich ein Staatsgebiet von 9.826.630 km² ergibt.
58  Die Nord-Süd-Ausdehnung zwischen der kanadischen und der mexikanischen Grenze beträgt etwa 2.500 km, die Ausdehnung zwischen Atlantik und Pazifik rund 4.500. Das Land liegt etwa zwischen dem 24. und 49. nördlichen Breitengrad und zwischen dem 68. und 125. westlichen Längengrad und ist in vier Zeitzonen eingeteilt.
59  Das Gebiet weist eine deutliche Gliederung auf. So erstrecken sich Gebirgszüge wie die vulkanischen Kaskadenkette, die Faltengebirge der Rocky Mountains und der Appalachen von Nord nach Süd. Während auf ihrer Wetterseite ausgedehnte Wälder bestehen, erstrecken sich in ihrem Windschatten riesige Trockengebiete mit Wüsten- oder Graslandschaften (Prärien). Flusssystem wie die von Mississippi und Missouri ermöglichten schon früh eine dichte Besiedlung, während die umgebenden trockenen Regionen bis heute dünn besiedelt sind.
60  Wichtigster Einflussfaktor des Klimas ist der polare Jetstream (Polarfrontjetstream), der umfangreiche Tiefdruckgebiete vom Nordpazifik bringt. Verbinden sich die Tiefs mit denjenigen von der atlantischen Küste, bringen sie im Winter als Nor'easters schwere Schneefälle. Da kein Gebirgszug westostwärts verläuft, bringen Winterstürme oftmals große Schneemengen weit in den Süden, während im Sommer die Hitze weit nordwärts bis nach Kanada reicht.
61  Die Gebiete zwischen den Gebirgszügen weisen dementsprechend hohe Temperaturextreme auf, dazu mehr oder minder große Trockenheit, die nach Süden und Westen zunimmt. Die Pazfikküste hingegen ist im Norden ein sehr regenreiches, häufig nebliges Gebiet. Das Gebiet um den Golf von Mexiko ist bereits subtropisch mit hohen Temperaturen im Sommer und häufig hoher Luftfeuchtigkeit. Zudem wird das Gebiet häufig von tropischen Wirbelströmen erreicht.
62  In Alaska herrscht arktisches Klima, die Gebirge sind zugleich die höchsten der USA (Mount McKinley, 6195 m). Hawaii, dessen Mauna Kea 4.205 m hoch ist, weist hingegen tropisches Klima auf.
63  Die Gebiete an der Ostküste bis zu den Großen Seen waren bis ins 19. Jahrhundert sehr stark bewaldet, die Westküste von mitunter extrem hohen Bäumen mit Wuchshöhen von über 100 m. Vieles davon ist in Ackerland umgewandelt oder bebaut worden, den überwiegenden Teil nehmen heute Nutzwälder ein. Die Artenvielfalt der trockeneren Graslandschaften ist im Zuge landwirtschaftlicher Nutzung ebenfalls stark reduziert worden. Schutzgebiete und -maßnahmen haben jedoch dazu geführt, dass viele der über 17.000 Gefäßpflanzenarten gerettet werden konnten. Allein Hawaii weist 1.800 Blütenpflanzen (Bedecktsamer) auf, von denen zahlreiche endemisch sind.[4]
64  Rund 400 Säugetier-, 750 Vogel- und 500 Reptilien- und Amphibienarten sowie weit über 90.000 Insektenarten bilden einen Teil der Fauna[5], wobei seit 1973 ein eigenes Gesetz bedrohte Arten schützt. 58 Nationalparks und mehrere hundert weitere Schutzgebiete weisen überwiegend eine starke Artenvielfalt auf, die in deutlichem Kontrast zu den weit verbreiteten Monokulturen steht.
65  Fast 80 % der Amerikaner lebten im Jahr 2000 in städtischen Gebieten.[6] 2006 hatten bereits 254 Orte mehr als 100.000 Einwohner, 50 Metropolregionen mit mehr als eine Million (bei nur 9 Städten). Die größten Metropolregionen waren 2006 New York (18,6 Millionen), Los Angeles (13), Chicago (9,5), Dallas (6), Philadelphia (5,8), Houston (5,5) und Phoenix (4). Die Hauptballungsräume lagen zwischen New York und den Großen Seen, in Kalifornien und Arizona, sowie in Texas, in geringerem Maße in Florida.
66  Die ersten kolonialen Einwanderer auf dem von Indianern besiedelten Kontinent waren Europäer, zunächst vorrangig spanischer, französischer und englischer Herkunft. Ab Mitte des 18. und verstärkt zur Mitte des 19. Jahrhunderts folgten Europäer deutschsprachiger und irischer Herkunft. Später kamen Einwanderer aus anderen Regionen Europas, vor allem aus Italien, Skandinavien und Osteuropa hinzu, einschließlich osteuropäischer Juden. Während der Volkszählung im Jahr 2000 gaben etwa 42,8 Millionen Personen eine deutsche Herkunft an. [7]
67  Die Amerikaner mit europäischen Vorfahren bilden heute 74 % der Gesamtbevölkerung. Afroamerikaner, mehrheitlich Nachfahren afrikanischer Sklaven, stellen etwas mehr als 13 %. Sie leben vor allem im Süden und in den großen Industriestädten des Nordens. Asiatische Einwanderer, zu großen Teilen aus China, Japan, Korea, Indien und den Philippinen stellen rund 4 %. Die Einwanderungspolitik war Anfang des 20. Jahrhunderts gegenüber Asiaten besonders restriktiv.
68  Es bestehen große Unterschiede in der Sozialstruktur zwischen weißer und schwarzer Bevölkerung. Schwarze haben im Durchschnitt ein geringeres Einkommen, eine kürzere Lebenserwartung und eine schlechtere Ausbildung. Sie sind sowohl häufiger Opfer als auch Täter in einem Tötungsdelikt, werden häufiger zum Tode verurteilt. Die Ursachen dafür und mögliche Wege der Problembehebung sind umstritten. Nicht nur in den Südstaaten sind Wohngegenden und nicht-öffentliche Einrichtungen – wie Kirchen oder private Organisationen – oft faktisch nach Ethnien getrennt, wenn auch die formale Trennung inzwischen ungesetzlich und verpönt ist.
69  Vor allem im Südwesten der USA und in Florida gibt es einen hohen Bevölkerungsanteil lateinamerikanischer Herkunft, die dort pauschal als „Hispanics“ oder „Latinos“ bezeichnet werden. Ihr Anteil wuchs in den letzten Jahrzehnten stetig (bis 2004 auf knapp 13 %), da viele Lateinamerikaner vor wirtschaftlicher Not in den Norden fliehen. Sie leben oft als illegale Einwanderer und halten stark an ihrer Kultur und Sprache fest.
70  Die Indianer („Native Americans“ oder „American Indians“) stellen heute nur noch rund 1 % der Bevölkerung. Nur in Alaska erreichen sie einen zweistelligen Prozentanteil an der Bevölkerung. Weitere Schwerpunkte bilden Kalifornien, Arizona, New Mexico, South Dakota und Oklahoma. Insgesamt gibt es 562 anerkannte Stämme, hinzu kommen 245 Gruppen, die derzeit nicht als Stamm (tribe) anerkannt sind.
71  Die meistgesprochene Sprache der USA ist amerikanisches Englisch. Daneben werden noch viele Sprachen der Indianer bzw. Hawaiier und die Sprachen anderer Immigranten gesprochen. Besonders hoch ist der Spanisch sprechende Anteil, wobei viele Einwanderer nur ihre spanische Muttersprache sprechen und zunehmend eigene Viertel in Städten bewohnen (zum Beispiel East Los Angeles). In Kalifornien beträgt ihr Anteil rund 30 %, wobei viele von ihnen zweisprachig sind. Etwa 30 bis 40 Millionen leben in den USA, viele ohne gültige Aufenthaltstitel. Während es im 19. Jahrhundert viele Zeitungen in deutscher Sprache gab, ist Spanisch die Sprache, in der heute Zeitungen am zweithäufigsten erscheinen.
72  Neben Deutsch (→ Deutschamerikaner) ist auch Französisch, Chinesisch, Koreanisch, Vietnamesisch und Polnisch verbreitet. Vor allem in Fällen, wo die Vermischung mit der übrigen Bevölkerung gering ist, wird die mitgebrachte Sprache in den folgenden Generationen beibehalten (zum Beispiel von den Amischen in Pennsylvania, Ohio, Indiana und Illinois).
73  Trotz der Vorzüge einer gemeinsamen Sprache haben die USA keine einheitliche Amtssprache festgelegt. Alle amtlichen Schriftstücke werden jedoch auf Englisch verfasst. In vielen Bundesstaaten ist Englisch Amtssprache; einzelne Staaten und Territorien definieren sich als zwei- oder dreisprachig, wie etwa Louisiana oder Hawaii. Zunehmend werden Dokumente und Beschilderungen ins Spanische übersetzt, jedoch bleibt dieses Phänomen meist regional beschränkt. Knapp 18 % der Amerikaner sprachen im Jahr 2006 zu Hause nicht Englisch, 10 % gaben bei der Volksbefragung 2000 Spanisch als Muttersprache an.
74  Am 8. Mai 2007 wurde dem Senat eine Resolution vorgelegt, nach der Englisch zur „Nationalsprache“ erklärt werden sollte.[8] 1847 gestattete ein Gesetz Französischunterricht in Louisiana, 1849 erkannte die kalifornische Verfassung Spanisch an. Mit dem Sezessionskrieg verschwanden die Rechte der Frankophonen, 1868 empfahl man die Unterrichtung der Indianer auf Englisch, 1896 sollte dies auch auf Hawaii gelten. Ab 1879 wurden kalifornische Gesetze nur noch auf Englisch veröffentlicht, während des Ersten Weltkriegs wurde der Gebrauch des Deutschen eingeschränkt. Einzelne Staaten, wie Virginia 1981, erklärten Englisch zur offiziellen Sprache. 2009 scheiterte ein Versuch, Englisch in Nashville zur einzigen Sprache zu machen.[9]
75  Die Regierung führt kein Register über den Religionsstatus der Einwohner. Das United States Census Bureau darf selbst keine Fragen zur Religionszugehörigkeit stellen, veröffentlicht aber die Ergebnisse anderer Umfragen.[10] In einer Umfrage der City University of New York 2001 bezeichneten sich rund 52 % der Bevölkerung als protestantisch, 24,5 % als römisch-katholisch, 14,2 % gaben keine religiöse Überzeugung an (rund 5,4 % waren explizit Atheisten oder Agnostiker), 3 % waren Mitglied einer orthodoxen Kirche, 2 % waren Mormonen, 1,4 % Juden[11] und 0,5 % Muslime. Kleinere Gruppen, je 0,3 bis 0,5 %, bezeichneten sich als Buddhisten (0,5 %), Hindus (0,4 %), Adventisten, Zeugen Jehovas oder hingen dem Unitarismus (0,3 %) an.[12] Die größte einzelne Konfession war die Römisch-Katholische Kirche, gefolgt von der Southern Baptist Convention, der United Methodist Church und den Mormonen. 4,8 Millionen Mitglieder weist die Evangelical Lutheran Church in America auf.
76  82 % der Amerikaner bezeichnen sich als „religiös“, 55 % als „sehr religiös“. Diese Werte sind etwa mit Mexiko vergleichbar. Hierbei sind Frauen wesentlich religiöser als Männer. 54 % beten mindestens einmal am Tag, ein Wert, der in Polen bei 32, in der Türkei bei 42 und in Brasilien bei 69 % liegt.[13]
77  Laut Soziologen wie Dennis Gilbert vom Hamilton College bestand die Gesellschaft 1998 aus sechs sozialen Klassen mit einem bestimmbaren Anteil an der Gesamtbevölkerung: einer Oberklasse (etwa 1 %), die aus den prominentesten, wohlhabendsten und mächtigsten Bürgern besteht; einer oberen Mittelklasse (etwa 15 %), die aus hochqualifizierten Berufstätigen wie Ärzten, Professoren, Anwälten besteht; einer unteren Mittelklasse (etwa 32 %), die aus gut ausgebildeten Berufstätigen wie Schullehrern und Handwerkern besteht; einer Arbeiterklasse (etwa 32 %), die aus Industriearbeitern und Lohnarbeitern (Blue-Collars) sowie einfachen Angestellten besteht, deren Arbeit sehr routiniert ist; und schließlich einer Unterklasse (etwa 20 %), die in zwei Gruppen zerfällt. Ihre obere Gruppe besteht aus den „Working Poor“, den arbeitenden Armen, die in schlecht bezahlten Jobs ohne Versicherung oder nur Teilzeit arbeiten. Die untere Gruppe arbeitet nicht und ist auf die – in den USA sehr geringfügige – öffentliche Wohlfahrt angewiesen (unemployed poor).
78  Auffällig ist dabei, dass diese Unterschichten meist in bestimmten Stadtvierteln der Großstädte leben, während die Mittelklasse in die suburbs, die Vororte ausgewichen ist. Der Armen-Anteil unter den Schwarzen und Hispanics ist überproportional hoch (etwa 30 %).[14]
79  Zwischen 1977 und 1999 stiegen die Einkommen im reichsten Hundertstel der Bevölkerung nach Steuerabzug um 115 %. Die Reallöhne für 60 % der Arbeitnehmer sind in dieser Zeit um 20 % gefallen. Die Zahl der Amerikaner, die in Armut leben, ist 2002 um 1,7 Millionen Menschen auf insgesamt 34,6 Millionen gestiegen. Die Zahl der in extremer Armut lebenden (weniger als die Hälfte der offiziellen Armutsgrenze), stieg von 13,4 Millionen 2001 auf 14,1 Millionen im Jahr 2002 an. Die Armuts- und auch die Kinderarmutsrate variieren stark zwischen ethnischen Gruppen.
80  2004 gab es laut Forbes in den USA 313 Milliardäre.[15] Das reichste Prozent der Bevölkerung erzielte 2005 mit 524 Milliarden Dollar ein Einkommen, das um 37 % höher lag als das der ärmsten 20 % der Bevölkerung (383 Milliarden Dollar)
81  Von 1951–1960 wanderten jährlich 2,5 Millionen Menschen ein, von 1971–1980 4,5 Millionen und in den 1990ern über 10 Millionen.[17] 2003 erhielten 463.204 Menschen die US-Staatsbürgerschaft, 1997 bis 2003 lag der Durchschnitt bei etwa 634.000.
82  Schon 1790 regelten die USA die Einwanderung mit dem Naturalization Act, einem Gesetz, das die Zuwanderung aus Europa fördern sollte, Schwarze und Unfreie jedoch ausschloss und einen „guten moralischen Charakter“ verlangte. 1882 schloss man Chinesen mit dem Chinese Exclusion Act explizit aus, eine Regelung, die 1943 leicht abgewandelt wiederholt wurde. 1891 entstand eine Einwanderungskommission, die jährlich Länderquoten festlegte.
83  1921 regelte der Emergency Quota Act erstmals die Einwanderung so, dass Nord- und Westeuropäer bevorzugt wurden, indem man ihren Bevölkerungsanteil entsprechend der Volkszählung einfror - eine Tendenz, die mit dem Immigration Act von 1924 verfestigt wurde.[18]
84  Erst ab 1965 wurde der Zeitpunkt der Antragstellung und die Weltregion berücksichtigt, dazu kamen Fälle der Familienzusammenführung. Seit 1978 gilt für die Einwanderung in die USA eine einheitliche Quote. 1970 waren noch 62 % der im Ausland geborenen Amerikaner Europäer, doch sank dieser Anteil bis 2000 auf 15 %.[19]
85  Inzwischen sind die Hispanics die größte Minderheit; von den 35,2 Millionen des Jahres 2000 stammten allein 20 Millionen aus Mexiko.[20] Die Schätzungen über die illegalen Einwanderer schwanken zwischen 7 und 20 Millionen.[21], die meisten schätzen ihre Zahl auf rund 12 Millionen.[22] Pro Jahr überqueren Zehntausende illegal die Südgrenze. Die staatliche Kommission für Menschenrechte in Mexiko gab an, dass allein 2007 500 Illegale beim Versuch, die Grenze zu überqueren, ums Leben kamen - häufig durch Verdursten. 1995 bis 2007 seien es 4700 Mexikaner gewesen.[23]
86  Um die illegale Einwanderung aus Mexiko zu bekämpfen, unterzeichnete Präsident Bush im Oktober 2006 ein Gesetz, das die Errichtung einer 1100 km langen Grenzbefestigung vorsah.[24] Zudem wurde die Unterstützung illegaler Einwanderer strafbar.
87  Schon 1954 hatte die Regierung versucht, mit der Operation Wetback 1,2 Millionen Hispanics abzuschieben - wobei sich das Schimpfwort „Nassrücken“ von den Mexikanern ableitete, die durch den Rio Grande geschwommen waren.[25] 1965 wurde die mexikanische Einwanderung eingeschränkt, mit dem Immigration Reform and Control Act von 1986 wurden erstmals illegale Einwanderer legalisiert.
88  2005 befanden sich über 2,2 % der Bevölkerung oder über 3 % der Erwachsenen entweder im Gefängnis (2,2 Millionen), oder sie waren zur Bewährung (4,1) oder zur Haftaussetzung (0,784) auf freiem Fuß.[26]. Zu Beginn des Jahres 2008 stieg die Zahl der Gefangenen weiter auf 2,32 Millionen. Damit stehen die Vereinigten Staaten im Verhältnis von Gefängnisinsassen zur Einwohnerzahl mit Abstand weltweit an der Spitze. Die Kriminalitätsrate blieb hingegen zunächst konstant und nahm später sogar ab.
89  Während der 60er Jahre war der Anteil der Strafgefangenen um etwa ein Prozent jährlich gesunken und erreichte 1975 mit 380.000  seinen Tiefststand. Seit etwa 1980 stiegen die Zahlen deutlich an, so dass es 1985 bereits 740.000 gab, und Ende 1998 gar zwei Millionen.
90  Zwei Drittel der Strafgefangenen stammen dabei aus Haushalten, die weniger als die Hälfte der als Armutsschwelle definierten Einkommen zur Verfügung hatten.[27][28][29]
91  2000 waren in den USA 133.610 Personen unter 18 Jahren in Haftanstalten und Jugendhaftanstalten untergebracht. Die Strafmündigkeit setzt in den Vereinigten Staaten weitaus früher ein als in Deutschland. In vielen Bundesstaaten können bereits 7-Jährige beim Verstoß gegen ein Strafgesetz zur Verantwortung gezogen werden, in den meisten 11-jährige.[30] 2005 wurden 1.403.555 unter 18-jährige verhaftet.[31] 2003 war es in 33 Bundesstaaten möglich, geisteskranke Kinder und Jugendliche auch dann in Haft unterzubringen, wenn diese nicht gegen das Strafrecht verstoßen hatten.[32]
92  Diese Bedingungen bewirken, dass Angehörige armer, kinderreicher Familien viel häufiger mit Gefängnisstrafen belegt werden. Da sich diese unter Schwarzen und Hispanics häufiger finden, sitzen viel mehr Jugendliche der großen Minderheiten im Gefängnis, als Angehörige „weißer“ Gruppen. Ähnliches gilt für die städtischen Indianer, nicht aber für die ländlich lebenden Gruppen.
93  Soziale Bewegungen wie die Neue Linke, die Bürgerrechtsbewegung und vor allem die Frauenbewegung rückten Ungleichheiten ins öffentliche Bewusstsein und erreichten rechtliche Angleichungen. Beeinflusst vom Erfolg der Bürgerrechtsbewegung für mehr Gleichheit unter den Ethnien und anderen Strömungen drängte eine Vielzahl von Organisationen und Lobbyisten darauf, volle Gleichberechtigung zu erzielen. Dieses Anliegen forderte eine grundsätzliche Revision von Institutionen, Sitten und Werten, ebenso wie im Selbstverständnis der Frauen.
94  In Neu England brachte die unter den frühen Siedlern herrschende strenge Familienordnung der Puritaner eine klare Unterordnung der Frau unter den Mann zur Geltung. Dies galt umso mehr für die schwarzen Sklavinnen und auch für die katholischen Frauen des spanischen Südwestens. Frauen waren weder voll rechtsmündig, erbberechtigt, noch wahlberechtigt, und eine einmal geschlossene, meist von den Eltern verabredete Ehe war nur schwer zu scheiden.
95  Die amerikanische Revolution brachte insofern eine Veränderung, als angeborene Rechte nun weniger die Stellung in der Gesellschaft bestimmten, als bürgerlich-republikanische Tugenden. Damit kam der Mutter eine staatsbürgerliche Erziehungsfunktion zu. Hinzu kam, dass romantische Ideen der Liebe Raum gewannen, insbesondere in den Städten. Während des Sezessionskrieges führten zahlreiche Frauen in Abwesenheit ihrer Männer Haushalte und Betriebe und sammelten für die Kriegsführung.
96  Frauen wie Lucretia Mott sahen sich aus christlichen Motiven veranlasst der Bewegung der Abolitionisten, die die Sklaverei abschaffen wollte, beizutreten und seit den 1830er Jahren tauchten Forderungen nach Gleichbehandlung auf. 1848 benutzte während der Seneca Falls Convention Elizabeth Cady Stanton die Begrifflichkeiten der Unabhängigkeitserklärung, um die Ungleichbehandlung der Frauen zu verdeutlichen. Neben den Frauen der Antisklavereibewegung schlossen sich auch Temperenzlerinnen an, die die Metapher von der Sklaverei benutzten, um die gewalttätigen häuslichen Verhältnisse zu bezeichnen. Vor allem nach dem Sezessionskrieg kam die Forderung nach dem Wahlrecht hinzu, das Frauen erst 1919 bzw. 1920 erhielten.[33] Wie häufig in den USA verbanden sich Forderungen dieser Art mit Befreiungsideologien, sowie antikapitallistischen und anitautoritären Bewegungen, wie sie etwa Emma Goldman repräsentierten. Die Frage der Kontrolle über Sexualität und Geburt wurde diskutiert und Organisationen, wie die American Birth Control League (heute Planned Parenthood) entstanden.[34]
97  Im Zuge der Weltwirtschaftskrise und des Zweiten Weltkriegs erlangten Frauen Anspruch auf eine geregelte Versorgung der Hinterbliebenen von Veteranen, von Witwen und ihren Kindern. Von den 16 Millionen Soldaten waren rund 350.000 Frauen, Millionen arbeiteten zudem in der Rüstungsindustrie.
98  Nach dem Krieg verdrängten die Heimkehrer viele Frauen von ihren Arbeitsplätzen, viele Jobs in der Rüstungsindustrie wurden nicht mehr gebraucht, und ein Babyboom brachte eine Wiederbelebung des häuslichen Ideals. Deutlicher Widerstand gegen dieses auch in den Massenmedien verbreitete Ideal setzte in den frühen 60er Jahren ein. Diese, häufig als zweite Welle bezeichnete Phase der Frauenbewegung hatte allerdings stärker wirtschaftliche Fragen im Blickpunkt, und solche des Lebensstils. Auch hier vermengten sich die verschiedenen gesellschaftlichen Bewegungen, etwa die Neue Linke. Gleicher Lohn, Zugang zu Berufen und Ausbildungen, zu Empfängnisverhütung und Abtreibung, aber auch informelle Ungleichbehandlung und Gewalt rückten stärker in den Mittelpunkt. Die Strafbarkeit von Vergewaltigungen wurde auch auf die Ehe ausgedehnt (Susan Brownmiller: Against our Will, 1975), Frauenhäuser und Telefonnotrufe entstanden.
99  Auf der politischen Ebene kamen die Frauen nur langsam voran. Erst 1994 waren erstmals mehr als zwei Frauen im Senat, und auch 2008 waren nur 15 % der Kongressangehörigen Frauen. 1981 war Sandra Day O'Connor die erste Richterin am Obersten Gerichtshof und im gleichen Jahr wurde Jeane Kirkpatrick von Präsident Ronald Reagan zur UN-Botschafterin ernannt. Die erste (nicht erfolgreiche) Kandidatin für das Amt der Vizepräsidentin war im Jahr 1984 Geraldine Ferraro. Madeleine Albright wurde 1993 von Präsident Bill Clinton zur UN-Botschafterin ernannt und war damit die zweite Frau, die dieses Amt inne hatte. 1997 wurde Albright dann Außenministerin. 2007 wurde mit Nancy Pelosi erstmals eine Frau Sprecherin des Repräsentantenhauses. Von 2005 bis Januar 2009 war die von Präsident George W. Bush ernannte Afroamerkanerin Condoleezza Rice Außenministerin der Vereinigten Staaten. Bei der Präsidentenwahl 2008 rang eine Frau, Hillary Clinton, um das Amt des demokratischen Präsidentschaftskandidaten, und die Republikische Partei stellte Sarah Palin als Kandidatin für das Amt der Vizepräsidentin auf.
100 In Alaska reichen die ältesten gesicherten menschlichen Spuren 12 bis 14.000 Jahre zurück. Als älteste Kultur galt lange die Clovis-Kultur, doch die Funde in den Paisley-Höhlen, die rund ein Jahrtausend vor den Clovis-Funden liegen, zeigten, dass Nordamerika schon früher bewohnt war. Als älteste menschliche Überreste gelten die Relikte der über 10.500 Jahre alten Buhl-Frau aus Idaho. An diese frühe Phase, die durch den Kennewick-Mann, der genetisch nicht zu den amerikanischen Völkern passt, neu diskutiert werden musste, schloss sich die Archaische Periode an.
101 Les États-Unis sont une union de 50 États, 48 d'entre eux étant adjacents les uns aux autres et situés entre l'océan Atlantique et l'océan Pacifique, d'est en ouest, puis bordés au nord par le Canada et au sud par le Mexique. Les deux derniers États sont l'Alaska, situé à l'ouest du Canada, et Hawaii, un État insulaire situé au milieu de l'océan Pacifique. De plus, le pays est composé de quatorze territoires insulaires disséminés dans la mer des Caraïbes et le Pacifique. La capitale fédérale, Washington, est dans le District de Columbia, un district fédéral hors des 50 États.
102 Les États-Unis comptent en 2008 plus de 302 millions d'habitants et constituent le troisième pays le plus peuplé du monde derrière la Chine et l'Inde. La superficie des États-Unis est de 9,4 millions de kilomètres carrés, ce qui en fait le quatrième pays le plus vaste du monde derrière la Russie, le Canada et la Chine[3]. L'immigration est très abondante et la population compte parmi les plus diversifiées au monde sur le plan ethnique et culturelle. L'économie nationale est la plus importante au monde avec le PIB le plus élevé de la planète.
103 Alors que la Déclaration d'indépendance des États-Unis d'Amérique fut proclamée le 4 juillet 1776 par les treize colonies britanniques en Amérique du Nord, les États-Unis ont obtenu leur indépendance du Royaume-Uni en 1783 suite à la guerre d'indépendance américaine, puis ont adopté la Constitution des États-Unis d'Amérique en 1787 lors de la Convention de Philadelphie. La Déclaration des droits (United States Bill of Rights) est quant à elle ratifiée par le premier Congrès des États-Unis en 1791.
104 Le développement du territoire s'est effectué principalement au XIXe siècle avec la conquête de l'Ouest et les guerres indiennes, mais aussi grâce à des ententes bilatérales effectuées avec d'autres nations européennes et nord-américaines.
105 En 1865, la guerre de Sécession se termine à l'avantage des États du Nord, protectionnistes et égalitaristes face à ceux du Sud, libre-échangistes et esclavagistes. La guerre hispano-américaine de 1898 et la Première Guerre mondiale ont par la suite confirmé la puissance militaire du pays. Depuis la Seconde Guerre mondiale, l'hégémonie des États-Unis est celle d'une superpuissance, notamment lors de la guerre froide.
106 Les États-Unis sont membres de l'Organisation du traité de l'Atlantique Nord (OTAN), de la Coopération économique pour l'Asie-Pacifique (APEC), de l'Accord de libre-échange nord-américain (ALENA), de l'Organisation des États américains (OEA), de l'ANZUS, de l'Organisation de coopération et de développement économiques (OCDE), du G8, et membres permanents du Conseil de sécurité des Nations unies.
107 La désignation en forme courte — d'usage dans la vie courante, l'enseignement et la cartographie[4] — de ce pays est « États-Unis » (en anglais United States, abrégé en US) et la forme longue – d'usage dans les documents officiels — est « États-Unis d'Amérique » (en anglais United States of America, abrégé en USA). La forme longue « États-Unis d'Amérique » ne ressemble pas à la grande majorité des formes longues qui commence par « République de », « Royaume de », etc. Elle est en revanche proche du pays voisin, les États unis Mexicains.
108 Le terme « Amérique » est parfois employé dans le langage courant, mais aussi dans des discours officiels, comme une abréviation pour désigner les seuls États-Unis d'Amérique.
109 La présence humaine est attestée en Alaska vers 20 000 ans av. J.-C.[5], vers 16 000 ans av. J.-C. sur la côte atlantique et vers 13 000 ans av. J.-C. sur le site Clovis (Nouveau-Mexique). Les premiers habitants des États-Unis actuels descendent des peuples préhistoriques venus d’Asie qui ont traversé le détroit de Béring au cours de la dernière glaciation il y a 30 000 ou 40 000 ans[6]. Plusieurs civilisations relativement avancées (Anasazis, Mound Builders, civilisation du Mississipi) se sont succédé sur le territoire et ont disparu mystérieusement avant l’arrivée des Européens.
110 Christophe Colomb découvre le continent américain en 1492 puis explore l’actuelle Porto Rico l'année suivante. Au XVIe siècle, les puissances européennes à la recherche du passage du Nord-Ouest et de richesses, naviguent puis s’installent le long du littoral atlantique. Ici se succèdent des colonies espagnoles, anglaises, françaises, hollandaises et scandinaves plus ou moins permanentes. Les établissements les plus célèbres et les plus anciens sont ceux de St. Augustine (Floride, 1565), Jamestown (1607) et Plymouth (fondée par les Pères pèlerins puritains en 1620). Au sud-ouest, les Espagnols agrandissent la Nouvelle-Espagne en menant des expéditions depuis le Mexique. Au nord-ouest, les Russes s’installent le long de la côte Pacifique. Les Blancs entrent en contact et font du commerce avec les peuples autochtones. Mais les Amérindiens ne résistent pas aux épidémies introduites par les Européens (variole, rougeole), à l’acculturation (alcool, armes à feu), aux massacres et aux guerres coloniales.
111 Au cours des XVIIe et XVIIIe siècles se forment progressivement les treize colonies britanniques de la côte orientale, ancêtres des États-Unis d’Amérique (carte). La colonisation est assurée par des compagnies et un système de chartes. Les Français explorent la vallée du Mississippi et fondent la Louisiane. L’Amérique du Nord devient rapidement un enjeu entre les puissances coloniales : l’Angleterre assure peu à peu sa suprématie en remportant les guerres anglo-néerlandaises puis la guerre de la Conquête (1763) contre la France, qui perd ses possessions de l’est du Mississippi (carte). Le peuplement se fait essentiellement par des migrants britanniques et par la traite négrière. Les esclaves noirs sont employés dans les plantations de tabac du sud mais aussi pour le développement des infrastructures. Vers 1775, les treize colonies sont prospères et comptent plus de deux millions d’habitants.
112 Dans le courant des années 1770, les colons américains s'opposent de plus en plus à leur métropole : Londres leur refuse les terres indiennes situées à l’ouest des montagnes Appalaches. Les taxes et les impôts sont augmentés alors que les sujets américains ne sont pas représentés au Parlement anglais. Le système de l’exclusif lèse les marchands de la côte est. De nouvelles troupes sont envoyées en Amérique et un climat révolutionnaire s’installe en Nouvelle-Angleterre, à Philadelphie et en Virginie. En 1770, les soldats britanniques tirent sur les manifestants (massacre de Boston). En 1774, les colons détruisent une cargaison de thé (Boston Tea Party) : la guerre éclate l’année suivante.
113 Les insurgents envoient des représentants au Congrès continental qui approuvent la déclaration d'indépendance des États-Unis le 4 juillet 1776. Ce texte, essentiellement rédigé par Thomas Jefferson, proclame les principes de liberté, d’égalité et de droit au bonheur. Pendant la guerre, plusieurs milliers de loyalistes fuient le pays. L’armée américaine, commandée par George Washington, finit par vaincre les Anglais avec le renfort de la France : le traité de Paris est signé en 1783 et consacre la souveraineté et la naissance des États-Unis.
114 Le second Congrès continental qui a ratifié les Articles de la Confédération en 1781, rédigent la Constitution américaine à la Convention de Philadelphie en 1787. Ce texte, auquel sont ajoutés dix amendements (Déclaration des Droits) en 1791, demeure aujourd’hui encore le fondement de la démocratie américaine. George Washington est choisi comme premier Président américain en 1789. Les institutions s’installent définitivement à Washington D.C. en 1800.
115 Le territoire américain s'agrandit progressivement vers l'ouest par des achats (Louisiane en 1803, Alaska en 1867) et des conflits. Poussés par la doctrine de la « Destinée manifeste » et par le « Mythe de la Frontière », les Américains font la guerre aux Amérindiens et spolient leurs terres. La guerre contre le Mexique (1846-1848) et le traité de Guadeloupe Hidalgo entraînent l'annexion du Texas puis de la Californie. Le traité de l'Oregon (1846) définit le tracé de la frontière entre les États-Unis et le Canada à l'ouest des montagnes Rocheuses. La ruée vers l'or à partir du milieu du XIXe siècle accélère la colonisation blanche de l'Ouest. Enfin, la construction du premier chemin de fer transcontinental (1869) facilite l'intégration des nouveaux territoires. La conquête de l'Ouest s'achève avec le Massacre de Wounded Knee (1890), l'annexion d'Hawaï (1898) et l'entrée de l'Arizona dans l'Union (1912).
116 Alors que la traite des Noirs est supprimée au niveau fédéral en 1808 et que les États du Nord ont aboli l'esclavage entre 1777[7] et 1804, les planteurs du Sud continuaient de défendre cette institution. En 1860, Abraham Lincoln, candidat du parti antiesclavagiste, remporte l'élection présidentielle : sept États esclavagistes font alors sécession et forment les États confédérés d'Amérique. La bataille de fort Sumter (avril 1861) marque le début de la guerre civile qui fit 970 000 victimes (3 % de la population américaine), dont 620 000 soldats[8]. Après la victoire de l'Union en 1865, trois nouveaux amendements à la constitution sont votés pour abolir l'esclavage, libérer les quatre millions d'esclaves[9], leur donner la citoyenneté et le droit de vote. Mais les lois Jim Crow introduisent la ségrégation raciale dans le Sud, jusque dans les années 1950-1960. La guerre de Sécession a également pour conséquence de renforcer le pouvoir fédéral[10].
117 L'industrialisation débute à partir des années 1850. Elle entraîne des bouleversements démographiques, économiques et sociaux considérables. Elle modifie la géographie du pays. Les villes américaines se multiplient et grandissent rapidement. L'immigration s'accélère et se diversifie. La Révolution industrielle donne naissance à un prolétariat urbain et accompagne la naissance d'un capitalisme sauvage. À la fin du XIXe et au début du XXe siècle, la deuxième révolution industrielle voit l'apparition de la société de consommation et de l'automobile. Les premiers gratte-ciel sont construits dans les centre-ville de New York et Chicago.
118 Les États-Unis doivent tout au long du XIXe siècle s'affirmer sur la scène internationale. Ainsi, le Royaume-Uni tente vainement de reprendre sa souveraineté sur le territoire américain lors de la guerre de 1812. Le pays remporte la guerre hispano-américaine en 1898 : Porto Rico et les Philippines passent sous contrôle de Washington.
119 C'est surtout la Première Guerre mondiale qui va consacrer la puissance américaine. Au XXe siècle, les États-Unis deviennent la première puissance économique, culturelle, politique et militaire du monde. D'abord neutre au début de la Première Guerre mondiale, le pays s'engage aux côtés des Alliés le 2 avril 1917 et renverse le rapport de force. Le Congrès des États-Unis refusera de ratifier le traité de Versailles (1919) et d'intégrer la Société des Nations, fidèle au principe de l'isolationnisme. L'entre-deux-guerres est d'abord une période de prospérité matérielle et d'effervescence culturelle appelée les « années folles ». Les femmes puis les Amérindiens obtiennent le droit de vote. C'est également le temps de la Prohibition.
120 Puis la Grande Dépression de 1929 qui suit le krach de Wall Street provoque une montée du chômage. Le Dust Bowl affecte le sud du pays et accroît la misère des paysans. Franklin Delano Roosevelt est élu en 1932 et propose un New Deal (« nouvelle donne ») pour combattre la crise, en posant les bases de l'État-providence. Le chômage ne se résorbe totalement que pendant la Seconde Guerre mondiale. L'attaque japonaise sur Pearl Harbor le 7 décembre 1941 provoque l'entrée en guerre des États-Unis dans le camp des Alliés contre l'Axe. L'armée américaine joue un grand rôle dans la libération de l'Europe occidentale et durant les campagnes du Pacifique. En août 1945, le président Harry Truman décide d'envoyer deux bombes atomiques pour faire capituler l'Empire du Japon. Les États-Unis deviennent une superpuissance aux côtés de l'URSS. La charte des Nations unies signée en juin 1945 à San Francisco, pose les bases de l'ONU, dont l'assemblée générale siège à New York.
121 Dans les années qui suivent le conflit, les États-Unis se posent en leader du camp capitaliste face à l'Union soviétique : la Guerre froide oppose alors deux modèles politiques et économiques. Afin d'endiguer le communisme, Washington intervient en Europe (plan Marshall, Berlin, création de l'OTAN) et en Asie (guerre de Corée, guerre du Viêt Nam, première guerre d'Afghanistan). Le pays se lance également dans la course à l'armement et à l'espace (création de la NASA en 1958, Premiers pas sur la lune en 1969). En 1962, la Crise des missiles de Cuba à failli être l'élément déclencheur de la troisième guerre mondiale, provoquera un « embargo », toujours actif, même si assoupli sous les présidences de Clinton et Obama.
122 L'histoire intérieure du pays est marquée par le Mouvement afro-américain des droits civiques dans les années 1950-1960 menées par Martin Luther King, par l'assassinat du président Kennedy en 1963 et le scandale du Watergate en 1974. En 1968, les États-Unis traversent une zone de turbulences. Ils sortent profondément bouleversés de l’année des contestations. À la différence de la France, l’année 1968 est, pour les États-Unis, la pointe de l’iceberg, le sommet d’une décennie troublée (Viêt Nam, Berkeley, assassinats de Martin Luther King et de Robert Kennedy, etc.), le début d’une période d’incertitudes[11]. La nouvelle politique de Reagan (1981-1989) est un succès autant dans le pays, avec les Reaganomics, que à l'étranger, ou il favorise les relations notamment avec l'URSS, et diminue les armements. Il est souvent perçu comme le vainqueur de la Guerre froide.
123 Depuis la fin de la Guerre froide et le démantèlement de l'Union soviétique en 1989-1991, les États-Unis sont aujourd'hui la seule hyperpuissance dans le Monde. Le pays s'engage dans les relations diplomatiques au Proche-Orient, et participe à la Guerre du Golfe (1990-1991). La présidence de Bill Clinton (1993-2001) fut marquée par les guerres en Yougoslavie, par l'affaire Monica Lewinsky, l'explosion de la bulle Internet et par une croissance économique continue. George W. Bush (2001-2009), arrive au pouvoir après une des élections les plus controversées de l'histoire du pays. Le 11 septembre 2001, les États-Unis sont victimes d'une vague d'attentats terroristes qui font près de trois mille morts.
124 Washington en réponse se lance dans une "Guerre contre le terrorisme" en Afghanistan puis en Irak (guerre d'Afghanistan et guerre en Irak). Le sud du pays est frappé de plein fouet en 2005 par Katrina, un des ouragans les plus ravageurs de toute l'histoire des États-Unis. Dès 2007, le pays est touché par une crise économique et financière, provoquée par crise des subprimes et qui deviendra mondiale. En 2008, Barack Obama est élu en tant que premier président afro-américain du pays, succède au président sortant Bush devenu impopulaire, et doit faire face à plusieurs problèmes.
125 Les États-Unis sont une république fédérale présidentielle bicamériste. La forme du gouvernement est celle de la démocratie représentative : le droit de vote est accordé aux citoyens américains de plus de 18 ans ; il n'est pas obligatoire.
126 Les citoyens américains sont gouvernés à trois échelons : le niveau fédéral depuis la capitale Washington D.C., le niveau des États fédérés et le niveau local (comtés, municipalités). La monnaie, la politique étrangère, l'armée et le commerce extérieur relèvent de l'État fédéral. Le pays est constitué de cinquante États fédérés qui disposent d'une pleine souveraineté dans de nombreux domaines : justice, éducation, transport, etc. Chacun des 50 États a son drapeau, son gouverneur, son congrès et son gouvernement. La législation diffère d'une circonscription à l'autre.
127 La constitution américaine est la plus ancienne constitution moderne encore en vigueur (1787). Complétée par la Déclaration des Droits et de nombreux amendements, elle garantit des droits individuels aux citoyens américains. Pour être adopté, un amendement doit recueillir l'approbation des 3/4 des États fédérés.
128 La dette publique américaine est la plus élevée du monde : en 2005, elle représentait 23 % du volume mondial[39]. Les États-Unis se classent 13e sur 120 pays pour la dette rapportée au PNB[40].
129 Le pouvoir exécutif est assuré par le président et le vice-président. Ils sont élus ensemble pour quatre ans, au suffrage universel indirect. Chaque État est représenté par son collège de grands électeurs dont le nombre est approximativement proportionnel au nombre d'habitants de l'État en question. Depuis 1951, le président ne peut exercer que deux mandats. Le Président est le commandant en chef, mais ne peut déclarer la guerre. Il réside à la Maison Blanche et possède un droit de veto sur les projets de loi. Il nomme les membres de son cabinet et dirige l'Administration américaine. Barack H. Obama a été élu président des États-Unis en novembre 2008 (son mandat a commencé le 20 janvier 2009).
130 Le pouvoir législatif revient à un Congrès composé de deux chambres, le Sénat et la Chambre des Représentants, qui siègent au Capitole. La chambre des représentants compte 435 membres, élus dans le cadre de districts (congressional district) pour un mandat de deux ans. Le nombre de députés dépend du poids démographique des États : les moins peuplés envoient un représentant au Congrès, alors que la Californie en dispose de 53. Chaque État élit deux sénateurs pour six ans, quelle que soit sa population. Le Sénat est renouvelé par tiers tous les deux ans
131 La Cour suprême est la plus haute instance du système judiciaire fédéral. Composée de neuf juges à vie choisis par le président avec l'accord du Sénat, elle interprète les lois et vérifie leur constitutionnalité.
132 La vie politique est dominée par deux partis : le Parti républicain et le Parti démocrate. Le Parti républicain, fondé en 1854, est considéré comme conservateur ou de droite, son symbole est l'éléphant et sa couleur le rouge. Le Parti démocrate est qualifié de liberal en anglais et classé au centre ou centre-gauche, son animal est l'âne et sa couleur le bleu. Parmi les partis de moindre importance figurent le Parti vert et le Parti communiste. Les États du Nord-Est, des Grands Lacs et de la côte ouest sont réputés plus progressistes que ceux du Sud et des Montagnes Rocheuses.
133 Les États-Unis d'Amérique sont composés de 50 États et un district fédéral, le District de Columbia. Les quarante-huit États attenants — tous les États sauf l'Alaska et Hawaii — sont aussi appelés États-Unis contigus ou « lower 48 » et occupent la majeure partie du centre de l'Amérique du Nord. L'Alaska est séparé des États-Unis contigus par le Canada; ensemble, ils forment les États-Unis continentaux. Hawaï, le cinquantième État, est situé dans le Pacifique.
134 La carte ci-contre montre les 50 États, les territoires et met en valeur les régions de recensement des États-Unis. Le District de Columbia n'apparaît pas.
135 En plus des territoires mentionnés sur la carte, les États-Unis comprennent aussi plusieurs autres territoires. L'atoll de Palmyra est un territoire non incorporé ; mais il est inhabité. Les îles mineures éloignées des États-Unis sont des îles inhabitées et des atolls du Pacifique et de la mer des Caraïbes. De plus, depuis 1898, l'US Navy a établi une importante base navale dans la baie de Guantánamo à Cuba.
136 Les États-Unis sont le quatrième pays le plus vaste (9 631 417 km) derrière la Russie, le Canada et la République populaire de Chine[12]. Avec 7 % des terres émergées de la planète, la taille du territoire américain est comparable à celle du continent européen et représente 17 fois celle de la France métropolitaine. Les États de l'Alaska et du Texas sont plus grands que la France. Situés en Amérique du Nord, les 48 États d'un seul tenant (appelés parfois « Mainland » ou « États-Unis continentaux »), dont la forme évoque un pentagone s'étirent sur quatre fuseaux horaires. 4 500 km séparent la côte atlantique à l'est et la côte pacifique à l'ouest[13]. Il faut parcourir 2 500 km pour relier le Canada au Mexique. Les États-Unis possèdent 12 034 km de frontières terrestres[14], 8 893 km avec le Canada (dont 2 477 km avec l'Alaska), 3 141 km avec le Mexique et 28 km avec Cuba (base navale de Guantanamo). La longueur totale des côtes américaines est de 19 924 km.
137 L'ensemble Missouri-Mississippi parcourt plus de 6 000 km dans le Mainland, l'équivalent du cours de l'Amazone en Amérique du Sud. Les deux derniers États fédérés sont Hawaii, un archipel volcanique de l'océan Pacifique Nord, et l'Alaska, à l'ouest du Canada. Au nord-est des Caraïbes, l'île de Porto Rico est un État libre associé : il s'agit également du plus grand et du plus peuplé des territoires américains.
138 Le point culminant du pays, le mont McKinley (6 194 mètres), se trouve en Alaska. Hors Alaska, le principal sommet est le mont Whitney en Californie. L'altitude la plus basse est celle de Badwater dans la Vallée de la Mort en Californie (- 86 mètres).
139 L'immensité du territoire, la grande variété des reliefs et des climats produisent des paysages très divers selon les régions. Les grands ensembles naturels du pays suivent grossièrement une organisation méridienne : à l'est, une plaine de plus en plus large en allant vers la Floride, borde l'océan Atlantique. La partie nord (Nouvelle-Angleterre) est soumise aux masses d'air polaires en hiver. Le sud subit les influences tropicales. Vers l'intérieur se succèdent les collines du piémont puis les montagnes Appalaches, qui culminent à 2 300 mètres d'altitude et sont couvertes de forêts.
140 Les plaines et plateaux du Centre sont drainés par l'ensemble fluvial du Mississippi et du Missouri. Au nord, les Grands Lacs (Amérique du Nord) représentent une importante voie de navigation reliée au fleuve Saint-Laurent. Les régions du sud (du Texas, à la Floride, en passant par la Louisiane) subissent le passage des cyclones à la fin de l'été, leur climat est subtropical humide sauf le sud de la Floride (région de Miami) déjà tropical. À l'est des montagnes Rocheuses s'étirent les Grandes Plaines fertiles puis les Hautes Plaines semi-arides, du Mexique au Canada. C'est là que se trouve la Tornado Alley.
141 L'Ouest américain est dominé par les montagnes Rocheuses, les Cascades et la Sierra Nevada qui encadrent des vallées (Vallée centrale de Californie), plateaux (plateau du Colorado, plateau de la Columbia) et des bassins d'altitude (Grand Bassin). Les montagnes Rocheuses culminent à environ 4 300 mètres dans le Colorado : le climat est montagnard et la végétation est étagée. Au nord se trouve le supervolcan du Yellowstone. Les bassins intérieurs sont marqués par l'aridité (Désert des Mojaves, Vallée de la mort). La côte Pacifique est dominée par des chaînes de montagnes couvertes de forêts. La région est soumise au risque volcanique (mont Saint Helens, mont Rainier) et sismique (faille de San Andreas). Le littoral des États de Washington et de l'Oregon sont en climat océanique très humide, celui de la Californie connaît un climat de type méditerranéen.
142 L'Alaska est un État où dominent les montagnes et les volcans actifs (archipel Alexandre, îles aléoutiennes) : le littoral subit les influences océaniques alors que l'extrême nord est en climat polaire. Enfin, l'archipel d'Hawaii est constitué d'une série de points chauds et connaît un climat tropical.
143 Les Américains se concentrent sur les littoraux, y compris ceux des Grands Lacs. À l'ouest du 100e méridien jusqu'au littoral du Pacifique et en Alaska, les densités sont globalement faibles, sauf en quelques villes isolées et en Californie. Cette dernière est l'État le plus peuplé des États-Unis et continue d'attirer les flux migratoires internes et externes.
144 Les États-Unis exercent une influence économique, politique et militaire sur le monde entier. Il est un membre permanent du conseil de sécurité des Nations unies et la ville de New York accueille le siège des Nations unies. Quasiment tous les pays ont une ambassade à Washington, D.C. et plusieurs consuls à travers le pays. De même, presque tous les pays accueillent une mission diplomatique américaine. Par contre, Cuba, Iran, Corée du Nord, Bhoutan, Soudan, et la République de Chine (Taïwan) n'ont pas de relations diplomatiques formelles avec les États-Unis.
145 Les États-Unis bénéficient d'une relation spéciale avec le Royaume-Uni et des liens étroits avec l'Australie, la Nouvelle-Zélande (dans le cadre de l'ANZUS), la Corée du Sud, le Japon, Israël, et les membres de l'OTAN. Il travaille également en étroite collaboration avec ses voisins par l'intermédiaire de l'organisation des États américains et d'accords de libre-échange, telles que la coopération trilatérale accord de libre-échange nord-américain avec Canada et Mexique. En 2005, les États-Unis ont dépensé 27 milliards $ en aide publique au développement, la plupart dans à travers le monde. Toutefois, comme part du revenu national brut (RNB), la contribution américaine représente 0,22 % et au vingtième rang de vingt-deux pays donateurs. Les sources non gouvernementales telles que des fondations privées, des sociétés, et de l'éducation et les institutions religieuses donnent pour un total de 96 milliards de dollars. Le total combiné est de 123 milliards de dollars soit le plus important dans le monde et le septième en pourcentage du RNB.[17
146 Le président détient le titre de commandant en chef de la nation, des forces armées et nomme ses dirigeants, le secrétaire à la Défense et ceux du comité des chefs d’États-majors interarmes. Le département de la Défense des États-Unis administre les forces armées, y compris l'armée, la marine, le Marine Corps, et la force aérienne . La Garde côtière est dirigée par le département de la Sécurité intérieure en temps de paix et par le Département de la Marine en temps de guerre. En 2005, les forces armées avaient 1,38 million de personnels en service actif, [18] en plus d'une plusieurs centaines de milliers dans la réserve et la Garde nationale, pour un total de 2,3 millions de soldats. Le ministère de la Défense emploie également environ 700 000 civils, sans compter ceux des entrepreneurs. Le service militaire est volontaire, bien que la conscription peut se produire en temps de guerre par le biais du système de service sélectif. Les forces américaines peuvent être déployées rapidement par l'armée de l'air grâce à sa grande flotte d'avions de transport et de ravitaillement aériens, l'United States Navy composée de onze porte-avions, et les Marine Expeditionary Unit en mer sur tous les océans du globe. Hors des États-Unis, les forces armées sont déployées sur 770 bases et installations, sur tous les continents à l'exception de l'Antarctique.[19][20]
147 Le total des dépenses militaires des États-Unis en 2006, plus de 528 milliards de dollars, comptait pour 46 % des dépenses militaires officielles mondiales et était supérieur à la somme des quatorze autres budgets militaires les plus importants combinées. (En termes de parité de pouvoir d'achat, cela correspond aux six prochains) Les dépenses par habitant étaient de 1756$ soit environ dix fois plus que la moyenne mondiale.[21]À 4,06% du PIB, les dépenses militaires des États-Unis sont classées 27e sur 172 nations.[22]La proposition de base pour le budget militaire pour l'année 2009 est de 515,4 milliards de $ soit une augmentation de 7% sur 2008 et de près de 74% de plus qu'en 2001.[23]Le coût estimé de la guerre en Irak pour les États-Unis jusqu'en 2016 est de 2,267 billions de dollars américains.[24]En date du 17 octobre 2008, engagé dans deux opérations militaires majeures, les États-Unis ont subi pendant la guerre d'Irak des pertes de 4 185 militaires tués et plus de 30 000 blessés[25] et 615 tués durant la guerre d'Afghanistan depuis 2001 [26].
148 Les États-Unis possèdent une économie mixte dans laquelle le secteur public en 2007 représente 12,4 % du PNB[33]. Ils possèdent depuis le début du XXe siècle la première puissance économique du monde. Selon le Fonds Monétaire International, les États-Unis produisent plus de 14 500 milliards de dollars, soit plus de 19 % de toutes les richesses de la planète[27]. En 2006, le PNB américain était légèrement inférieur à celui de l’Union européenne à parité de pouvoir d'achat[34]. Le pays se place à la huitième place mondiale pour le PNB par habitant et à la quatrième place à parité de pouvoir d’achat[27]. Le taux de chômage est relativement faible, entre habituellement 3 et 5 % de la population active. Cependant la crise économique de 2008 a entraîné une remontée du chômage si bien que ce taux atteint 6,5% en novembre 2008 (d'après l'OIT)[35]. Le PNB américain a augmenté de 32% entre 2000 et 2008 tandis le budget de l'États fédéral est passé durant la même période de 1 798 milliards à 2 931 milliards de dollars soit une augmentation de presque 40% [36]
149 Les secteurs les plus dynamiques sont la chimie, l'informatique, l'aérospatiale, la santé, les biotechnologies et les industries de l'armement, même si l'avance s'est réduite depuis la fin de la Seconde Guerre mondiale. Le principal point fort de cette économie post-industrielle reste le secteur tertiaire (grande distribution, services financiers et bancaires, assurances, production cinématographique, tourisme …), qui contribue pour 75 % du PNB.
150 Les États-Unis sont les plus grands importateurs de biens et les deuxièmes exportateurs derrière l’Allemagne. Le Canada, la Chine, le Mexique, le Japon et l’Allemagne sont les principaux partenaires commerciaux[37]. La balance commerciale américaine est déficitaire, en particulier avec la Chine. Le matériel électrique constitue la principale exportation ; le pays importe de nombreux véhicules automobiles[38]. Les bourses de New York sont les premières du monde.
151 Gli Stati Uniti d'America, comunemente abbreviati in Stati Uniti, anche conosciuti con l'acronimo USA (inglese viene usata anche l'abbreviazione States dell'originale denominazione ufficiale ingua inglese), sono una repubblica federale democratica dell'America settentrionale composta da 50 stati e un distretto federale. Confinano a nord con il Canada e a sud con il Messico, mentre ad est e ad ovest sono bagnati rispettivamente dall'oceano Atlantico e dall'oceano Pacifico. Le acque territoriali dell'Alaska - lo stato più vasto - confinano con la Russia (Stretto di Bering). Lo stato delle Hawaii è formato da un arcipelago localizzato nel centro dell’oceano Pacifico. Il paese possiede anche alcuni territori e zone insulari, sparsi tra il mar dei Caraibi e il Pacifico.
152 Con una superficie di oltre 9,83 milioni di km² e con più di 300 milioni di abitanti, gli Stati Uniti sono il terzo paese più esteso al mondo, e il terzo più popolato. Gli Stati Uniti sono uno dei paesi con la maggior diversità etnica e la sua multiculturalità è il prodotto di un’immigrazione su larga scala dai più svariati paesi dei diversi continenti.[2] L'economia statunitense è la più grande del mondo, con una stima del prodotto interno lordo (PIL) nel 2008 di 14.300 miliardi di $ (che rappresenta il 23% del totale mondiale basato sul PIL nominale e quasi il 21% del PIL calcolato a parità di potere d'acquisto).[1] [3]
153 La federazione è stata fondata da tredici colonie del Regno Unito situate lungo la costa atlantica. Il 4 luglio 1776, con la Dichiarazione di indipendenza, hanno proclamato la loro indipendenza dalla Gran Bretagna. Gli stati si ribellarono e sconfissero i britannici nella guerra di indipendenza americana, prima grande colonia a rivoltarsi con successo contro le leggi coloniali.[4] Una Convenzione Federale (Convenzione di Filadelfia) adottò l'attuale Costituzione degli Stati Uniti d'America il 17 settembre 1787; con la ratifica, l'anno successivo nasceva una repubblica con un forte governo centrale. La Carta dei Diritti, che comprendeva dieci emendamenti costituzionali per garantire molti diritti civili fondamentali e libertà, venne ratificata nel 1791.
154 Nel corso del XIX secolo gli Stati Uniti acquisirono nuovi territori da Francia, Spagna, Regno Unito, Messico e Russia, annettendo la Repubblica del Texas e la Repubblica di Hawaii. Le controversie tra il Sud agrario e il Nord industriale sull’affermazione dei diritti e l'espansione dell’istituzione della schiavitù provocò la guerra di secessione americana del 1861. Il Nord impedì una scissione del paese e portò la fine della schiavitù legale negli Stati Uniti. La guerra ispano-americana e la prima guerra mondiale confermarono lo status di potenza militare. Nel 1945 gli Stati Uniti emersero dalla seconda guerra mondiale come il primo paese dotato di armi nucleari, membro permanente del Consiglio di Sicurezza dell’ONU, e un membro fondatore della NATO. La fine della guerra fredda, e il conseguente crollo dell'Unione Sovietica, lasciarono gli Stati Uniti come unica superpotenza.
155 Il sostantivo America deriva dal nome dell'esploratore fiorentino Amerigo Vespucci,[5] che per primo riconobbe di essere di fronte a un nuovo continente, e non, come si credeva, ad alcune isole asiatiche. La prima volta che comparve il nome America fu nel libro Cosmographiae Introductio, pubblicato nel 1507 dal cartografo tedesco Martin Waldseemüller, che propose di dare al "nuovo continente" il nome di Vespucci.
156 Il nome completo del paese è stato utilizzato per la prima volta ufficialmente nella Dichiarazione d'indipendenza, con la dicitura di "unanime Dichiarazione dei tredici Stati Uniti d'America", adottata dai "Rappresentanti degli Stati Uniti d'America" il 4 luglio 1776.[6] L'attuale nome (sensibilmente corretto) risale al 15 novembre 1777, quando il secondo Congresso Continentale adottò gli articoli della Confederazione, utilizzando The United States of America (Gli Stati Uniti d'America). La forma più breve, Stati Uniti è normalmente utilizzata. Altre forme comuni includono gli U.S, U.S.A., o semplicemente America. Il nome Columbia, un tempo nome popolare per le Americhe e per gli Stati Uniti (in onore di Cristoforo Colombo), permane nel nome Distretto di Columbia.
157 Il modo standard per fare riferimento a un cittadino degli Stati Uniti è con il termine americano o statunitense. L’aggettivo americano è il più comune adottato per riferirsi al paese ("valori americani", "le forze americane"). Americano è raramente usato nella lingua inglese per riferirsi a persone che non sono in riferimento agli Stati Uniti.[7]
158 Le popolazioni indigene del continente americano, tra cui i nativi dell'Alaska, migrarono dall'Asia in una data variabile, a secondo della ricerca, tra i 12.000 e i 40.000 anni fa.[8] Alcune civiltà precolombiane svilupparono un’avanzata agricoltura, una grande architettura, ed un alto livello di società. Nel 1492, l’esploratore genovese Cristoforo Colombo, sotto la corona spagnola, raggiunse diverse isole dei Caraibi, contribuendo al primo contatto dell’uomo bianco con le popolazioni indigene. Milioni di indigeni americani morirono in seguito a causa delle epidemie portate dagli europei.[9]
159 Il 2 aprile 1513 il conquistatore spagnolo Juan Ponce de León sbarcò in una regione che chiamò "La Florida", il primo contatto europeo documentato su quello che sarebbero diventati gli Stati Uniti. Degli insediamenti spagnoli nella regione, rimane solo St. Augustine, fondata nel 1565. Altri insediamenti spagnoli vennero creati nell’odierno sud degli Stati Uniti, attirando migliaia di persone attraverso il Messico. I commercianti di pellicce francesi stabilirono avamposti nella Nuova Francia nella regione dei Grandi Laghi; successivamente la Francia si impadronì di gran parte del Nord America, penetrando fino al Golfo del Messico. La prima colonia inglese di una certa entità fu Jamestown, Virginia, fondata nel 1607. Nel 1628 venne fondata la Massachusetts Bay Colony da parte dei Puritani che portò ad un’ondata migratoria; nel 1634 nella Nuova Inghilterra erano insediati circa 10.000 Puritani. Tra la fine degli anni ’10 del 1600 e la Rivoluzione Americana, vennero spediti circa 50.000 detenuti nelle colonie americane britanniche.[10] Nel 1614 venne fondato un insediamento olandese lungo il fiume Hudson inferiore, includendo New Amsterdam sull’isola di Manhattan.
160 Nel 1674 gli olandesi cedettero il loro territorio americano all'Inghilterra, la provincia della Nuova Olanda venne ribattezzata New York. Molti dei nuovi immigrati, soprattutto nel Sud, erano schiavi (circa due terzi di tutti gli immigrati della Virginia tra il 1630 e 1680).[11] Con la fine del secolo, furono gli schiavi africani a diventare la fonte primaria di lavoro. Nel 1729 con la divisione della Carolina, e la colonizzazione della Georgia del 1732, si completava il cerchio delle tredici colonie britanniche che sarebbero diventate gli Stati Uniti d'America. Con tassi di natalità elevati, bassi tassi di mortalità, e una costante immigrazione, la popolazione coloniale crebbe rapidamente. Nella Guerra franco-indiana le forze britanniche si impadronirono del Canada francese. Esclusi i nativi americani, le tredici colonie avevano una popolazione di 2,6 milioni di abitanti nel 1770, circa un terzo della Gran Bretagna, e quasi uno su cinque erano schiavi neri.[12] Anche se soggetti alla tassazione britannica, le colonie americane non avevano rappresentanza nel Parlamento della Gran Bretagna.
161 Tensioni crescenti tra i coloni americani e gli inglesi durante gli anni sessanta e settanta del 1700 portarono alla Guerra di indipendenza americana, combattuta dal 1775 al 1781. Il 14 giugno 1775, il Congresso continentale, tenutosi a Filadelfia, istituì un esercito continentale sotto il comando di George Washington. Annunciando che "tutti gli uomini sono creati uguali" e dotati di "diritti inalienabili", il Congresso adottò la Dichiarazione d'Indipendenza, redatta in gran parte da Thomas Jefferson, il 4 luglio 1776. Tale data celebrata ogni anno come il “giorno dell’Indipendenza”.
162 Dopo la sconfitta dell’esercito britannico da parte delle forze americane assistite dai francesi, la Gran Bretagna riconobbe l'indipendenza degli Stati Uniti la sovranità sul territorio americano fino al fiume Mississippi. La Costituzione degli Stati Uniti d'America venne ratificato nel 1788, e il primo presidente, George Washington, entrò in carica nel 1789.
163 Gli atteggiamenti verso la schiavitù mutarono; una clausola nella Costituzione protesse il commercio di schiavi africani solo fino al 1808. Il Nord abolì la schiavitù tra il 1780 e il 1804.
164 Acquisizioni territoriali aumentarono il desiderio americano di espansione verso l’Ovest, richiedendo una lunga serie di guerre indiane e politica volte a spogliare i popoli indigeni delle loro terre. L'acquisto della Louisiana francese, sotto la guida del Presidente Thomas Jefferson nel 1803, raddoppiò quasi la dimensione della federazione. La guerra del 1812 contro la Gran Bretagna rafforzò il nazionalismo. Una serie di incursioni militari statunitensi in Florida portarono la Spagna a cedere altro territorio lungo la costa del Golfo del Messico nel 1819. Ci fu l’annessione della Repubblica del Texas nel 1845. Nel 1846 fu siglato il trattato dell'Oregon con la Gran Bretagna, portando al controllo da parte statunitense sul Nord-Ovest americano. La vittoria degli Stati Uniti nella guerra contro il Messico nel 1848 portò all’annessione della California e di gran parte dell’odierno Sud-ovest americano. La corsa all'oro tra il 1848 e 1849 portarono ad un’ulteriore migrazione verso occidente. La nuova rete ferroviaria rese più facile il trasferimento di coloni e l'aumento dei conflitti con i nativi americani. In mezzo secolo vennero abbattuti fino a 40 milioni di bisonti americani per le pelli e la carne. Una risorsa primaria che scompariva dalle pianure, causando un grave contraccolpo in molte culture native.
165 Le tensioni tra gli Stati del Nord e quelli del Sud aumentarono su argomenti quali il rapporto tra lo Stato e i governi federali, come pure la diffusione della schiavitù nei nuovi Stati membri. Abraham Lincoln fu eletto presidente nel 1860. Poco prima sette Stati schiavisti dichiararono la loro secessione. Si arrivò alla Guerra di secessione americana iniziata con l’attacco a Fort Sumter. Dopo la vittoria dell'Unione nel 1865, tre emendamenti alla Costituzione degli Stati Uniti d'America garantirono la libertà a quasi quattro milioni di africani americani un tempo schiavi,[13] rendendoli cittadini, e donando loro il diritto di voto. La guerra e la sua risoluzione portarono ad un aumento sostanziale del potere federale.[14]
166 Nel Nord, l'urbanizzazione e un afflusso senza precedenti di immigrati provenienti dagli stati meridionali e orientali affrettò il processo di industrializzazione. L'ondata di immigrazione durò fino al 1929. Massicce protezioni tariffarie, la costruzione di infrastrutture, e nuovi regolamenti bancari, incoraggiarono la crescita economica. Nel 1867 gli Stati Uniti acquistarono l’Alaska dalla Russia completando l’espansione continentale. Il Massacro di Wounded Knee nel 1890 fu l'ultimo grande conflitto armato delle Guerre Indiane. Nel 1893, la monarchia indigena del Regno di Hawaii venne rovesciato in un colpo di stato portato avanti dagli americani residenti; gli Stati Uniti annessero l'arcipelago nel 1898. La vittoria nella Guerra ispano-americana dello stesso anno dimostrò che gli Stati Uniti erano oramai una potenza mondiale e portò all’annessione di Porto Rico, Guam e delle Filippine. Le Filippine ottennero l'indipendenza solo mezzo secolo più tardi; Porto Rico e Guam rimangono ancora territori degli Stati Uniti.
167 Allo scoppio della Prima guerra mondiale nel 1914, gli Stati Uniti rimasero neutrali. La maggior parte degli americani simpatizzava per i britannici e i francesi, anche se molti erano contrari all’intervento.[15] Nel 1917 gli Stati Uniti si unirono agli alleati, contro gli Imperi Centrali. Dopo la guerra il Senato non ratificò il trattato di Versailles, che istituiva la Lega delle Nazioni. Il paese perseguì una politica unilaterale di quasi isolazionismo.[16] Negli anni ‘20 un emendamento costituzionale concesse il suffragio alle donne. La prosperità dei ruggenti anni Venti si concluse con il crollo di Wall Street del 1929 che diede inizio alla Grande Depressione. Dopo la sua elezione a presidente nel 1932, Franklin Delano Roosevelt diede inizio al New Deal, una serie crescente di politiche di intervento del governo nell'economia. Il Dust Bowl a metà degli anni ’30 impoverì molte comunità agricole e stimolò una nuova ondata migratoria verso occidente.
168 Gli Stati Uniti, effettivamente neutrali durante la Seconda Guerra Mondiale dopo l'invasione nazista della Polonia nel settembre 1939, iniziarono la fornitura di materiali agli Alleati nel marzo 1941 tramite il programma Lend-Lease. Il 7 dicembre 1941 gli Stati Uniti entrarono in guerra con gli Alleati contro le potenze dell’Asse in seguito ad un attacco a sorpresa su Pearl Harbor da parte del Giappone. La Seconda Guerra Mondiale ebbe un costo economico superiore a qualsiasi altra guerra nella storia americana,[17] ma favorì l'economia, fornendo capitali e garantendo l’occupazione.
169 Tra i grandi paesi combattenti, la federazione è stata l'unica a diventare più ricca (di gran lunga) in conseguenza alla guerra.[18] Le conferenze di Bretton Woods e Yalta delinearono un nuovo sistema nelle organizzazioni internazionali, ponendo gli Stati Uniti e l’Unione Sovietica al centro del mondo. Con la vittoria in Europa, nel 1945 venne tenuta una conferenza internazionale a San Francisco che portò alla Carta delle Nazioni Unite, divenuta attiva dopo la guerra .[19]
170 Gli Stati Uniti, dopo aver sviluppato le prime armi nucleari, sganciarono la bomba atomica sulle città giapponesi di Hiroshima e Nagasaki nell’agosto del 1945. Il Giappone si arrese il 2 settembre, ponendo fine alla guerra .[20]
171 Gli Stati Uniti e Unione Sovietica si spartirono il potere dopo la Seconda Guerra Mondiale, durante la Guerra Fredda, e dominarono gli affari militari dell'Europa attraverso la NATO e il Patto di Varsavia. Gli Stati Uniti promossero la democrazia liberale e il capitalismo, mentre l'Unione Sovietica promosse il comunismo e un’economia pianificata a livello centrale. Le truppe americane combatterono le forze comuniste nella Guerra di Corea del 1950-1953, e si sperimentò la crisi missilistica di Cuba.
172 Al lancio sovietico del primo equipaggio umano nello spazio nel 1961 risposero gli Stati Uniti con il primo uomo sulla Luna nel 1969. Il paese conobbe una forte espansione economica. Un crescente movimento dei diritti civili, guidata da africani americani, come Martin Luther King, combatterono la segregazione e la discriminazione razziale. Dopo l'assassinio di Kennedy nel 1963 vennero approvati il Civil Rights Act del 1964 e il Voting Rights Act del 1965 dal Presidente Lyndon B. Johnson. Johnson e il suo successore, Richard Nixon, portarono il paese ad una nuova guerra nel Sud-Est asiatico, la Guerra del Vietnam. In questi anni furono grandi le riforme sociali, nacque il movimento femminista e si sviluppò il dibattito sui problemi ambientali e sui diritti civili, e l’opposizione alla guerra.
173 Come risultato dello scandalo Watergate, Nixon divenne il primo presidente degli Stati Uniti a dimettersi nel 1974. Durante il governo di Jimmy Carter alla fine degli anni settanta, l'economia degli Stati Uniti sperimentò la stagflazione. L'elezione di Ronald Reagan come presidente nel 1980 segnò un significativo spostamento verso destra della politica americana, che si riflesse nelle principali modifiche in materia fiscale e nelle priorità di spesa.[21] Tra la fine degli anni ottanta e l'inizio degli anni novanta, l'Unione Sovietica crollò, ponendo fine alla Guerra Fredda.
174 Il ruolo di leadership assunto dagli Stati Uniti e dei suoi alleati -la Guerra del Golfo sotto la guida del Presidente George H.W. Bush, e la guerra in Jugoslavia sotto la guida del Presidente Bill Clinton- contribuì a preservare la propria posizione di superpotenza. La più lunga espansione economica nella storia moderna degli Stati Uniti coprì il periodo tra marzo 1991 e marzo 2001, prevalentemente sotto l'amministrazione Clinton.[22]
175 Gli attentati dell'11 settembre 2001 che colpirono il World Trade Center di New York e il Pentagono uccisero quasi tremila persone. In risposta, il Presidente George W. Bush lanciò la guerra contro il terrorismo. Alla fine del 2001 le forze americane invasero l'Afghanistan, rovesciando il governo dei talebani che però continuarono le operazioni di guerriglia. Nel 2002 l'amministrazione Bush iniziò a premere per il cambiamento del regime in Iraq. Sebbene senza il sostegno della NATO o di un esplicito mandato delle Nazioni Unite si arrivò all’invasione dell'Iraq nel 2003 che portò alla cattura del presidente Saddam Hussein. La guerra in Iraq, non ancora conclusa, vede l’opposizione dalla maggior parte degli americani.[23] Il 4 novembre 2008 il senatore democratico Barack Obama è stato eletto presidente (il suo mandato è iniziato il 20 gennaio 2009), primo afro-americano nella storia degli USA, battendo il senatore repubblicano John McCain.
176 Gli Stati Uniti si trovano quasi interamente nell’emisfero occidentale: gli Stati Uniti continentali sono bagnati dall’Oceano Pacifico a ovest, dall'Oceano Atlantico a est, e a sud-est dal Golfo del Messico. I paesi confinanti sono il Canada a nord e il Messico a sud. L’Alaska è lo stato più vasto, mentre le Hawaii occupano un arcipelago nel Pacifico centrale. Dopo la Russia e il Canada, gli Stati Uniti hanno il terzo posto come paese più esteso del mondo. La classifica varia a seconda di come vengono conteggiati i due territori contestati dalla Cina con l'India e la superficie stessa degli Stati Uniti: il CIA World Factbook segnala 9.826.630 km²,[24] lo United Nations Statistics Division fornisce 9.629.091 km², [25] l'Enciclopedia Britannica 9.522.055 km².[26] Gli Stati Uniti possiedono anche diversi territori insulari sparsi tra l'Oceano Pacifico (ad esempio Guam) e i Caraibi (compreso Porto Rico, che è legato agli Stati Uniti in un'associazione chiamata Commonwealth).
177 Dalle pianura costiera dell’atlantico spostandosi verso l’interno si incontrano i boschi decidui e le dolci colline del Piedmont. I monti Appalachi dividono la costa orientale dai Grandi Laghi alle praterie del Midwest. Il Mississippi-Missouri, il quarto sistema fluviale più lungo del mondo, attraversa da nord verso sud il centro del paese. Le piatte e fertili praterie delle Grandi Pianure si estende ad ovest, interrotte da un altopiano nella regione sud-est. Le Montagne Rocciose, al margine occidentale delle Grandi Pianure si estendono da nord a sud attraverso tutto il paese, raggiungendo altitudini superiori ai 4.300 metri in Colorado. Più ad ovest sono si incontrano le rocce del Gran Bacino e deserti come il Mojave. Le catene montuose della Sierra Nevada e la Catena delle Cascate si snodano prossimi oramai alla costa del Pacifico. Con i suoi 6.194 metri sul livello del mare, il Monte McKinley, in Alaska è la vetta più elevata del paese. Vulcani attivi sono comuni e presenti in tutta la regione costiera che va dall’Arcipelago Alexander alle Isole Aleutine, attraversando la Penisola di Alaska, oltre che nell’arcipelago delle Hawaii. Il supervulcano presente nel Parco Nazionale di Yellowstone nelle Montagne Rocciose è più grande vulcano presente all’interno della parte continentale degli Stati Uniti.[27]
178 Gli Stati Uniti, con la loro grande dimensione e varietà geografica, comprendono al loro interno la maggior parte dei vari tipi di clima. Ad est del 100° meridiano il clima varia da umido continentale nel nord fino a subtropicale umido a sud. Nella punta meridionale della Florida è presente un clima tropicale, così come alle Hawaii. Le Grandi Pianure ad ovest del 100° meridiano sono generalmente semi-aride. In gran parte delle regioni montane dell’Ovest sono caratterizzate da un clima alpino. Il clima è arido nel Gran Bacino, desertico nel Sud-Ovest, mediterraneo lungo la costa californiana, oceanico lungo la costiere di Oregon, Washington e Alaska meridionale. La maggior parte dell’Alaska rientra però nel clima subartico o polare. Fenomeni meteorologici estremi non sono rari, con le regioni costiere lungo il Golfo del Messico soggette al rischio uragani.
179 L’ecologia degli Stati Uniti è molto varia: circa 17.000 specie di piante vascolari sono presenti negli Stati Uniti contigui e nell'Alaska, e oltre 1800 specie di piante fiorite si trovano nelle isole Hawaii, alcune delle quali presenti anche nel continente.[28] Gli Stati Uniti sono la patria di più oltre 400 specie di mammiferi, 700 specie di uccelli, 500 specie di rettili e anfibi, e 90.000 specie di insetti.[29] La specie minacciate di estinzione legge del 1973 protegge minacciate e di specie minacciate e dei loro habitat, che sono monitorati da parte degli Stati Uniti di pesce e della fauna selvatica del servizio. Sono presenti 58 parchi nazionali e centinaia di altri parchi, foreste e zone desertiche protette a livello federale.[30] Nel complesso il governo gestisce il 28,8% del territorio, buona parte del quale è protetta.[31]
180 Gli stati principali sono suddivisi in quelli della costa orientale (East Coast), il sud (South), il Midwest, la zona montana (Mountain states, compreso il Southwest), e la costa occidentale (West Coast). Gli stati della costa orientale sono, da nord a sud, Maine, New Hampshire, Vermont (che non è sulla costa), Massachusetts, Rhode Island (il più piccolo degli stati), Connecticut, New York, Pennsylvania (che è vicino alla costa e la cui metà occidentale è spesso considerata parte del Midwest), New Jersey, Delaware, Maryland, Virginia, Carolina del Nord, Carolina del Sud, Georgia, Florida. Gli ultimi 5 (dalla Virginia) vengono anche contati come stati del Sud.
181 Geograficamente questa zona comprende montagne basse e molto antiche, gli Appalachi, con un andamento generalmente da nord-est a sud-ovest, oltre a molti fenomeni locali, compresi i fenomeni glaciali a nord, le faglie tettoniche della valle dell'Hudson, e la zona di origine calcarea (corallina) della Florida. Il corso dei fiumi è generalmente da ovest verso est. I fiumi tendono ad essere di lunghezza limitata ma ampi e dal flusso regolare. Le maree sono spesso forti, soprattutto al nord. Gli inverni sono freddi (nel nord) o moderati (al sud) e umidi, le estati ugualmente umide.
182 Gli stati del Sud comprendono i summenzionati Virginia, Carolina del Nord/Sud, Georgia, Florida, e anche Virginia Occidentale (spesso considerato parte del Midwest, dato che era dalla parte del nord nella guerra civile), Kentucky, Tennessee, Alabama, Louisiana, Arkansas, Oklahoma, Texas (spesso considerato fra gli stati del sud-ovest). Questa zona comprende la parte meridionale (e le cime più elevate) degli Appalachi, e più a ovest l'altopiano d'Ozark. I fiumi comprendono le foci del Mississippi e del Río Grande. La più grande influenza climatica viene dal Golfo del Messico, e comprende inverni miti, umidità, e di tanto in tanto uragani.
183 Gli stati del Midwest comprendono Ohio, Michigan, Indiana, Wisconsin, Illinois, Missouri, Minnesota, Iowa, Dakota del Nord, Dakota del Sud, Nebraska e Kansas. Sono in gran parte stati agricoli e industriali (compresa la "rust belt", la zona industriale "arrugginita" negli anni settanta e ottanta dalla concorrenza, soprattutto giapponese), freddi d'inverno, caldi d'estate, con clima da umido (verso est) a secco (verso ovest). È qui che si trova il "cuore" ("heartland") degli Stati Uniti, ed è considerato un centro di valori morali (lavoro serio, casa e famiglia, i pionieri sulla prateria, e così via) per il resto del paese.
184 Gli stati della zona montana comprendono Montana, Idaho, Wyoming, Nevada, Utah, Colorado, Arizona, Nuovo Messico. Gli ultimi quattro spesso anche considerati gli stati del sud-ovest. Soprattutto a sud la zona è secca, con molti deserti (deserto Sonorano) e le Montagne Rocciose. A nord ci sono inverni molto freddi ed estati miti, mentre a sud gli inverni sono miti e le estati calde. Questa è la zona meno abitata del paese, ed è dove si trovano molte delle destinazioni sceniche degli Stati Uniti, per esempio il Grand Canyon (Arizona) e Yellowstone (Wyoming). La geografia della costa occidentale (Washington, Oregon, California) comprende montagne elevate (Sierra Nevada), vari vulcani, deserti (Death Valley), e zone molto umide (la costa, soprattutto a nord).
185 L'immigrazione negli Stati Uniti fu sempre molto intensa nel corso della storia, specialmente dall'Europa, la parte meridionale fu interessata dall'immigrazione dalla Spagna, tranne la zona della Louisiana che al tempo si estendeva fino al Canada. I primi immigrati nelle 13 colonie provenivano dal Regno Unito ma in seguito fu fortissima l'immigrazione dalla Germania dove il numero degli abitanti era quasi pari a quello degli immigrati britannici, mentre nella zona dell'attuale stato del New York erano presenti immigrati dai Paesi Bassi. L'immigrazione dalla Francia fu frequente dopo il cedimento della Louisiana agli Stati Uniti da parte di Napoleone Bonaparte. Nell'ottocento fu enorme l'immigrazione dall'Irlanda, ed altrettanto forte quella dall'Italia, specie a cavallo tra l'800 ed il '900. L'immigrazione proseguì nel novecento con l'arrivo di immigrati dai paesi scandinavi, e durante la seconda guerra mondiale di Ebrei (circa 6 milioni) specialmente dalla Russia, dalla Polonia e dall'Ungheria.
186 Con più di 305 milioni di abitanti (fine 2008), gli Stati Uniti sono il terzo paese al mondo per popolazione, dopo Cina ed India.
187 La zona più popolata del Paese è quella nordorientale, di antica urbanizzazione. Di recente si sono espanse anche le zone urbane della costa pacifica, specie in California.
188 Secondo l'ultimo censimento ufficiale (2000), il 75,1% della popolazione è bianca, il 12,3% nera o di origine afroamericana, il 3,6% asiatica, e solo lo 0,9% di origine amerindia. Va notato che il 5,5% si è dichiarato di altre etnie, mentre il 2,4% di origine mista.
189 I latinoamericani di ogni etnia costituiscono, sempre secondo l'ultimo censimento, il 12,5% della popolazione. Percentualmente vengono subito dopo i residenti di ascendenza tedesca (15,2%), ma prima di quelli di origine irlandese (10,9%) ed inglese (8,7%). Consistenti sono anche le minoranze asiatiche, soprattutto cinesi. I residenti di ascendenza italiana rappresentano il 5,6% della popolazione totale. Il gruppo comunemente identificato come WASP, Bianco, Anglosassone, Anglicana, pur detenendo ancora le leve del potere politico ed economico, non costituisce più la maggioranza della popolazione del paese.
190 La popolazione è generalmente in crescita, specie grazie ad una forte immigrazione, proveniente in buona parte dall'America Latina e dall'Asia sudorientale. La presenza di immigrati - o di loro discendenti diretti - è molto rilevante nella parte sud occidentale del paese. Più di 37 milioni di cittadini sono nati all'estero e circa 15 milioni di questi sono stati naturalizzati cittadini statunitensi.
191 L'Affirmative Action, una politica a favore dei gruppi minoritari, ha permesso negli ultimi decenni agli appartenenti alle minoranze etniche un più facile accesso alle Università, a molti posti di lavoro che precedentemente erano loro preclusi e ad incarichi di grande responsabilità nel mondo politico e nell'alta finanza.Questo però da qualcuno è visto come una sorta di razzismo al contrario nei confronti di una parte di popolazione.
192 Per quanto riguarda le origini della popolazione statunitense (stima del 2006)[32] si calcola che abbiano le seguenti discendenze (anche se solo lontane o parziali): Circa 36,6 milioni sono afroamericani. Circa 198 milioni sono bianchi non ispanici così suddivisi: 50,7 milioni sono originari della Germania, 36,5 milioni del Regno Unito, 36,5 milioni dell'Irlanda, 17,8 milioni dell'Italia, 11,8 milioni della Francia (compresi franco-canadesi), 10 milioni della Polonia, 5 milioni dei Paesi Bassi, 4,6 della Norvegia , 4,4 milioni della Svezia, 3 milioni della Russia, 1,5 milioni dell'Ungheria, 1,5 milioni della Danimarca, 1,4 milioni della Grecia e altrettanti dell'Armenia e del Portogallo. Di minore consistenza qualche altro milione rappresentato dai paesi europei non elencati sopra.
193 Circa 15 milioni di persone sono di origine asiatica, soprattutto Filippine (4 milioni), Cina (3,5 milioni), India (2,7 milioni), Vietnam (1,6 milioni), Corea (1,5 milioni) e Giappone (1,2 milioni). Da una stima fatta nel 2007 risulta che 45,5 milioni di cittadini statunitensi sono di origine ispanica ( di qualsiasi razza ) in particolare dal Messico (28 milioni), da Porto Rico (4 milioni), da Cuba (1,5 milioni), da El Salvador (1,4 milioni).
194 I nativi americani sono circa 2,5 milioni. L'immigrazione ispanica è tutt'oggi la più numerosa (molti sono i clandestini entrati illegalmente dal Messico) e si dice che tra qualche decennio il numero degli ispanici supererà quello degli americani di lingua inglese.
195 Tra il 1947 e il 1979 il reddito medio è aumentato di oltre l’80% nell’insieme di tutte le classi di reddito, con i redditi più bassi cresciuti ad un ritmo più elevato rispetto a quelli elevati. [65] [66] Il reddito familiare medio è aumentato dal 1980[67] in gran parte a causa di un doppio reddito all’interno delle famiglie, la riduzione del divario tra i sessi, e per il maggior numero di ore lavorate, ma la crescita è stata più lenta e maggiormente concentrata nei redditi più elevati.[60][65][68] Di conseguenza, i redditi di gran lunga più elevati, che corrispondono all’1% dei redditi, hanno generato il 21,8% del reddito totale prodotto nel paese nel 2005, cifra che è più che raddoppiato dal 1980,[69] rendendo gli Stati Uniti uno dei paesi con la maggiore disparità di reddito tra nazioni sviluppate.[60][70] [71] La ricchezza, come reddito, è estremamente concentrata: il 10% della popolazione, la fascia più ricca, possiede il 69,8% della ricchezza del paese, la seconda quota più elevata tra le nazioni sviluppate.[72] Il 1% posto al vertice possiede il 33,4% del patrimonio netto.[73]
196 Gli Stati Uniti hanno un sistema economico capitalista di tipo misto, con un grande contributo delle imprese private nelle decisioni microeconomiche, regolate però dalle scelte del governo. Caratterizzata da alta produttività, alimentata da abbondanti risorse naturali, e da una sviluppata rete di infrastrutture, secondo il Fondo Monetario Internazionale, l’economia degli Stati Uniti genera un PIL annuo di 14.300 miliardi di $, che costituisce il 23% del prodotto interno lordo mondiale lordo ai prezzi di mercato, e quasi il 21% del prodotto mondiale lordo a parità di potere d'acquisto (PPA).[1] È la più grande economia statuale del pianeta in termini di PIL, solo il 4% in meno circa rispetto al PIL combinato di tutti i paesi dell'Unione europea a PPA generato nel 2007.[39] Il PIL pro capite l’ottavo in termini nominali e il quarto in termini di parità di potere d'acquisto.[1] GLi Stati Uniti sono il più grande importatore di merci e il terzo maggiore esportatore, anche se le esportazioni pro capite sono relativamente basse. Canada, Cina, Messico, Giappone e Germania sono i principali partner commerciali.[40] Le principali merci di esportazione sono macchinari elettrici, mentre i veicoli costituiscono la principale voce delle importazioni.[41]
197 Il settore privato costituisce la maggior parte dell'economia, mentre le attività governative partecipano al 12,4% del PIL. L'economia è prevalentemente postindustriale, con il settore dei servizi che contribuisce al 67,8% del PIL.[42] Il principale settore in termini di giro d’affari è quello del commercio all'ingrosso e al dettaglio; in termini di reddito netto è quello della finanza e assicurazioni.[43] Gli Stati Uniti restano una potenza industriale, con produzioni nell’industria chimica e manifatturiera leader nei rispettivi settori.[44] Gli Stati Uniti sono il terzo più grande produttore di petrolio del mondo, così come il più grande importatore di questa materia prima.[45] [46] E’ leader nella produzione di energia elettrica e nucleare, come pure come per l’estrazione di gas naturale, zolfo, fosfati, e sale. Sebbene l'agricoltura rappresenti poco meno dell’1% del PIL, gli Stati Uniti sono i migliori produttori mondiali di mais[47] e soia.[48] Il New York Stock Exchange è la più grande borsa valori del mondo.[49] Coca-Cola e McDonald's sono i due marchi più riconosciuti a livello globale.[50]
198 Nel 2005 la forza lavoro retribuita era pari a 155 milioni di persone, di cui l’80% a tempo pieno.[51] La maggioranza, il 79%, era impiegate nel settore dei servizi.[24] Con circa 15,5 milioni di persone, il settore dell’assistenza sanitaria e assistenza sociale rappresentava il principale settore di occupazione.[52] Circa il 12% dei lavoratori è sindacalizzato, contro il 30% dell’Europa occidentale.[53] La Banca Mondiale classifica gli Stati Uniti nel primo posto per facilità nell'assunzione dei lavoratori.[54] Tra il 1973 e il 2003, le ore lavorative medie per un lavoratore americano è cresciuto di 199 ore.[55] Come risultato, gli Stati Uniti mantengono la più alta produttività del lavoro del mondo, sebbene non in termini di produttività per ora lavorata come fino ai primi anni ’90: i lavoratori di Norvegia, Francia, Belgio e Lussemburgo si trovano meglio piazzati in questo indicatore.[56] Rispetto all'Europa, negli Stati Uniti le tasse su proprietà e reddito delle società sono in genere più elevate, mentre il lavoro sconta in genere aliquote fiscali più basse.[57]
199 Secondo lo United States Census Bureau, il reddito medio lordo delle famiglie americane nel 2007 è stato di 50.233 $, con medie che variano dai 68.080 $ nel Maryland ai 36.338 $ del Mississippi.[38] A parità di potere d'acquisto la media è simile ai quella delle maggiori nazioni sviluppate. I tassi di povertà, dopo essere scesi bruscamente durante la metà del XX secolo, si sono stabilizzati dai primi anni ‘70, con l’11,15% degli americani al di sotto della soglia di povertà, e il 58,5% che ha sperimentato almeno un anno in condizioni di povertà tra i 25 e i 75 anni di età.[58][59] Nel 2007 ben 37,3 milioni di americani vivevano in condizioni di povertà.[38] Lo stato sociale è ormai tra i più austeri nel mondo sviluppato, e tende a ridurre sia la povertà relativa che assoluta, inferiore alla media delle nazioni ricche.[60] [61] Ma mentre lo stato sociale tutela e riduce la fascia debole tra la popolazione anziana,[62] in proporzione poco è fatto per la fascia più giovane.[63] Uno studio 2007 dell’UNICEF sul benessere dei bambini tra le 21 nazioni più industrializzate, pone gli Stati Uniti tra gli ultimi posti.[64]
200 Nonostante i forti aumenti di produttività, la bassa disoccupazione e la bassa inflazione, gli incrementi di reddito a partire dagli anni ‘80 hanno avuto una crescita lenta rispetto ai precedenti decenni, oltre ad essere stato meno ampliamente condivisi, e accompagnati da una maggiore insicurezza economica.
201 Amerikan yhdysvallat (engl. the United States of America, lyh. USA) on pääosin Pohjois-Amerikassa sijaitseva perustuslaillinen liittovaltio, joka koostuu 50 osavaltiosta ja yhdestä liittovaltion hallinnollisesta piirikunnasta sekä useista erillisalueista. Se on asukasluvultaan ja pinta-alaltaan maailman kolmanneksi suurin valtio. Bruttokansantuotteeltaan Yhdysvallat on maailman suurin. Yhdysvaltojen laaja-alainen maahanmuutto on johtanut yhteen maailman etnisesti ja sosiaalisesti monimuotoisimmista väestöistä.[5]
202 Yhdysvalloilla on yli 200 vuoden historia itsenäisenä valtiona ja se on yksi maailman vanhimmista perustuslaillisista tasavalloista.[6] Kolmetoista Britannian siirtokuntaa perusti liittovaltion 1700-luvun lopussa. Itsenäisyysjulistus annettiin 4. heinäkuuta 1776 ja maa tunnustettiin vapaussodan jälkeen vuonna 1783. Yhdysvaltain perustuslaki otettiin käyttöön 1787. Seuraavan vuosisadan aikana maa laajeni, mutta osavaltioiden erimielisyydet ajoivat maan sisällissotaan, joka käytiin vuosina 1861–1865. 1900-luvulla Yhdysvalloista tuli kylmän sodan jälkeen selkein jäljellä oleva supervalta, joka on yksi maailman tärkeimmistä vaikuttajista.[7][8]
203 Ennen eurooppalaista Amerikkojen kolonisaatiota Pohjois-Amerikkaa asuttivat alkuperäiskansat, joiden esivanhemmat vaelsivat Beringinsalmen kautta Siperiasta Pohjois-Amerikkaan vähintään 12 000 vuotta, mahdollisesti jopa 40 000 vuotta[9][10] sitten.[11][12] Siellä heitä asui arviosta riippuen n. 1–15 miljoonaa ennen eurooppalaisten tuloa.[13][14] Biisoneita Pohjois-Amerikan tasangoilla vaelsi kymmeniä miljoonia. Lähes kaikki kansat harjoittivat metsästystä saaden biisoneista, hirvistä ja peuroista lihaa ravinnoksi, nahkoja vaatteiksi, jänteitä jousiksi ja luita nuolenkärjiksi. Moni intiaanikansa harjoitti myös maanviljelyä, kalastusta ja keräilyä siellä missä olosuhteet sen sallivat.
204 1500-luvun alussa eurooppalaiset alkoivat tutkia nykyistä Yhdysvaltojen aluetta. Ensimmäinen vahvistettu eurooppalainen havainto alueesta on Kristoffer Kolumbuksen maihinnousu toisella matkallaan Puerto Ricolle 19. marraskuuta 1493. Ensimmäisen eurooppalaisen asutuksen nykyisiin Yhdysvaltoihin perusti Juan Ponce de León 1508, samoin Puerto Ricoon. 2. huhtikuuta 1513 Ponce de León nousi ensimmäisenä eurooppalaisena nykyisten Yhdysvaltojen mannermaalle, Floridaan. Ensimmäiset eurooppalaiset siirtokunnat nykyisten Yhdysvaltain alueelle perustivat espanjalaiset Floridaan: Pensacolan 1559, Fort Carolinen 1564 ja St. Augustinen 1565. Ranskalaiset tutkivat ja asuttivat Suurten järvien aluetta ja Mississippin vartta.
205 Ensimmäinen brittien siirtokunta nykyisten Yhdysvaltojen alueella oli Roanoke nykyisessä Pohjois-Carolinassa. Sinne oli yritetty perustaa siirtokuntaa jo 1585 ja uudestaan vuonna 1587. Kun brittilaivoja saapui uudestaan paikalle 1590, siirtokunta oli kadonnut. Vuonna 1607 britit perustivat nykyiseen Virginiaan Jamestownin siirtokunnan. Britit lähettivät vallankumoukseen mennessä noin 50 000 rikollista siirtokuntiin.[15] Myös Mayflower-laivalla Englannista ja Hollannista lähteneiden uskonnollista vainoa paenneiden siirtolaisten (engl. pilgrims, ”pyhiinvaeltajat”) oli vuonna 1620 alun perin tarkoitus matkata Virginiaan, mutta jostain syystä he purjehtivat paljon pohjoisemmaksi ja laskivat ensiksi maihin nykyisen Cape Codin niemellä. Lopulta he perustivat siirtokunnakseen Plymouthin nykyisessä Massachusettsissa. Paikalliset intiaanit auttoivat heitä selviytymään talvesta ja seuraavasta kesästäkin, ja pyhiinvaeltajat viettivät vuoden 1621 sadonkorjuujuhlaa yhdessä intiaanien kanssa ensimmäisenä kiitospäivänä.
206 Vuonna 1626 Hollannin Länsi-Intian kauppakomppania perusti Uuden Amsterdamin kaupungin Hudsonjoen suulle ja Orangen siirtokunnan Uuden Alankomaan keskukseksi joen yläjuoksulla. Vuonna 1638 perustettiin Uusi Ruotsi nykyisen Delawaren–Pennsylvanian alueelle. Hollanti valtasi siirtokunnan 1653. Samoihin aikoihin olivat alkaneet myös nk. majavasodat missä osapuolina olivat hollantilaisten puolella oleva irokeesien liittokunta ja ranskalaisten puolella taistelevat kanadalaiset heimot. Kyseessä oli turkiskaupan herruus sillä heimot tiesivät saavansa voittoja sodassa tuliaseiden avulla jotka oli saatavilla majavannahkakaupan avulla. Irokeesit onnistuivat tuliaseiden avulla tuhoamaan useita heimoja suurten järvien ympäristöstä edesauttaen melko tehokkaasti uudisasutuksen leviämistä. Vuonna 1759 Ranskan valta alkoi merkittävästi heikentyä kun englantilaiset intiaaniliittolaisineen valtasivat Quebeckin. Vuonna 1663 perustettiin puuvillan ja maalaisaateliston Carolina. Vuonna 1664 Englanti valtasi Uuden Amsterdamin ja nimesi sen New Yorkiksi. New Jerseyn kehitys alkoi 1665. Kveekarien johtaja William Penn sai 1681 Kaarle II:lta lainansa vastineeksi maa-alueen, josta kehittyi Pennsylvania. Kun Georgia perustettiin vuonna 1732 velkavankeudesta vapautettujen englantilaisten turvapaikaksi, brittiläisiä siirtokuntia oli kolmetoista.
207 Vuonna 1760 Yhdysvalloissa oli 1 500 000 eurooppalaista ja luku kasvoi nopeasti. New Yorkissa, Bostonissa ja Philadelphiassa oli noin 200 000 asukasta.selvennä? Englanti, joka oli velkaantunut seitsenvuotisessa sodassa, pani siirtokunnat verolle vuonna 1765 ja vuonna 1767 se asetti niille teetullin. Vastalauseena järjestettiin Bostonin teekutsut: Bostonissa heitettiin tullista vapautettu teelasti mereen vuonna 1773. Vuonna 1774 siirtokuntien ensimmäinen kongressi totesi Philadelphiassa, että hallitusten valta ulottuu vain niin pitkälle kuin alamaiset sallivat, ja että hallitusten valta perustuu hallittavien suostumukseen. Seuraavana vuonna Britannian parlamentti katsoi Massachusettsin olevan kapinassa ja siirtokunnat päätettiin saartaa. Tästä seurasi Yhdysvaltain vapaussota. 15. kesäkuuta 1775 George Washington nimitettiin armeijan ylipäälliköksi. Amerikkalaisilla oli pula varusteista ja Benjamin Franklin ajatteli jopa turvautua jousipyssyihin, mutta kaksi päivää myöhemmin vallattiin Bunker Hill.
208 Yhdysvallat julistautui itsenäiseksi 4. heinäkuuta 1776, kun kongressin asettama valiokunta, johon kuuluivat John Adams, Roger Sherman, Robert R. Livingstone, Thomas Jefferson ja Benjamin Franklin, laati itsenäisyysjulistuksen. Sotaonni ei ollut aina suosiollinen amerikkalaisille, ja englantilaiset kieltäytyivät neuvottelemasta ellei itsenäisyysjulistusta peruutettu. Ranska liittyi itsenäisyystaisteluun siirtokuntien puolella solmimalla liittosopimuksen Benjamin Franklinin kanssa ja lähetti Lafajetten ja Roshanbon joukkoineen Amerikkaan. Samalla Ranska sai vahingonkorvausta seitsenvuotisesta sodasta. Englantilaiset lyötiin Saratogan taistelussa vuonna 1777.
209 Yhdysvaltain itsenäisyys tunnustettiin kansainvälisesti 3. syyskuuta 1783. Yhdysvalloissa oli aluksi kolmetoista osavaltiota. Ne olivat Georgia, Etelä-Carolina, Pohjois-Carolina, Virginia, Maryland, Delaware, Pennsylvania, New Jersey, New York, Connecticut, Rhode Island, Massachusetts ja New Hampshire. Itsenäistymisen jälkeen noin 70 000–80 000 Britannialle uskollista lähti maasta. Heistä noin 50 000 siirtyi brittien Kanadan provinsseihin.[16]
210 Vuodesta 1803 vuoteen 1848 Yhdysvaltain koko lähes kolminkertaistui, kun uudisasukkaat valtasivat länttä. Vuonna 1803 Thomas Jeffersonin hallitus osti Ranskan Napoleonilta Mississippijoen länsipuolelle ulottautuvan Louisianan alueen. Aluekauppa oli huomattavasti nykyistä Louisianan osavaltiota suurempi – hankitut alueet käsittävät nykyisin 23 % maan pinta-alasta.
211 1500-luvulta alkaen yli kymmenen miljoonaa tummaihoista afrikkalaista kuljetettiin Pohjois-Amerikkaan työskentelemään orjina ja vuosina 1837–1839 kymmeniätuhansia intiaaneja pakkosiirrettiin Mississippijoen länsipuolelle, varsinkin nykyiseen Oklahomaan, jonka nimi oli tuolloin Intiaanialue. Intiaanien kanssa solmitut sopimukset jouduttiin lähes kaikki rikkomaan sillä kuten eräs kongressin edustaja kirjoitti: "ei ole voimaa pysäyttää meidän valloittavan kansamme eteneminen". Tämä johti väistämättä kahakoihin intiaanien kanssa jotka puolustivat metsästysmaitaan. Vuonna 1845 Yhdysvaltoihin liittyi Meksikosta 1836 itsenäistynyt Texas. Meksikon kanssa käydyn sodan tuloksena Yhdysvaltoihin liitettiin 1848 suunnilleen nykyisten Kalifornian, Nevadan, Utahin, Arizonan ja New Mexicon osavaltioiden alueet Guadeloupe Hidalgon rauhassa 2. helmikuuta 1848. Arizonan ja New Mexicon alue laajeni etelään Gilajoen eteläpuolelle Meksikon kanssa 1853 tehdyllä kymmenen miljoonan silloisen Yhdysvaltain dollarin Gadsdenin kaupalla. Vuonna 1848 Kaliforniasta löydettiin kultaa ja alueelle alkoi suuri kultarynnäkkö. Alueen intiaanien kohtalo oli tuhoisa ja useita kansoja tuhottiin lähes sukupuuttoon. Teollistumisen aikakautta eläviä amerikkalaisia hallitsi nopean rikastumisen tarve ja usein tapana oli lakaista esteet pois tieltä välittämättä seurauksista. Tämä 1800-luvun lopun biisonien teurastamisen varjoon jäänyt tapahtuma on yksi Amerikan synkimmistä. Mark Twain kirjoitti kirjassaan "koiran elämää" (roughing it): "Kuvitelkaa että joku ventovieras tulisi asuinalueellenne keskelle kaunista hedelmäpuutarhaanne ja alkaisi sitten hakuin, lapioin ja räjähdyspanosten voimalla tärvelemään maapalstaanne... Toisinaan tuntuu uskomattomalta ajatella että paikalla missä on nyt vain niittyä ja metsää ei ole mitään mikä olisi muistuttamassa siitä, mitä paikalla oli parikymmentä vuotta sitten: kukoistava parin kolmentuhannen asukkaan kaupunki... Missään muualla maailmassa ei varmasti ole kadonnut kaupunkeja niin jäljettömiin kuin Kalifornian entisillä kultakentillä."
212 Ne tuolloin vielä harvaan asutut alueet, jotka liitettiin Yhdysvaltoihin Louisianan aluekaupalla ja myöhemmin Guadeloupe Hidalgon rauhansopimuksella, eivät aluksi kuuluneet mihinkään osavaltioon, vaan olivat liittovaltion hallinnassa. Vasta vuosikymmeniä myöhemmin, kun niiden asukasluku oli huomattavasti kasvanut, alueelle perustettiin nykyiset osavaltiot. Vasta vuodesta 1912 lähtien Yhdysvaltojen koko manneralue oli jaettu osavaltioiksi, muista erillään sijaitsevaa Alaskaa lukuun ottamatta, joka muodostettiin osavaltioksi vuonna 1959.
213 Kysymys orjuudesta tai sen lakkauttamisesta oli vuosikymmenien ajan Yhdysvaltojen suurimpia sisäisiä kiistakysymyksiä. Pohjoisissa osavaltioissa orjuus kiellettiin pian maan itsenäistymisen jälkeen, mikäli sitä oli ennestäänkään ollut, mutta etelävaltioissa se pysyi 1860-luvulle saakka, ja sen jatkamista vaadittiin varsinkin sen vuoksi, koska pelättiin puuvillateollisuuden muussa tapauksessa lamaantuvan. Niillä läntisillä raja-alueilla, jotka tuolloin eivät vielä kuuluneet mihinkään osavaltioon, orjuus oli vuonna 1820 säädetyn lain (Missourin kompromissin) mukaan sallittua vain leveyspiirin 36° 30' eteläpuolella.[17] Samaa leveyspiiriä pitkin tulivat myöhemmin kulkemaan alueelle perustettujen uusien osavaltioiden rajat.
214 Orjuuden ohella huomattavaksi kiistakysymykseksi muodostuivat osavaltioiden oikeudet ja liittovaltion rooli. Kiistat kärjistyivät siinä määrin, että ne johtivat Yhdysvaltain sisällissotaan 1861–1865. Sodassa pohjoiset osavaltiot estivät eteläisten osavaltioiden itsenäistymisyrityksen. Pohjoisvaltioiden voitettua orjuus lakkautettiin kaikkialla Yhdysvalloissa vuonna 1865, mikä tarkoitti vapautta lähes neljälle miljoonalle orjalle.[18] Sisällissota oli merkittävä ja traumaattinen tapahtuma maan historiassa.
215 Sisällissodan jälkeen suuri määrä maahanmuuttajia virtasi Yhdysvaltoihin. Vuonna 1829 oli määritelty "pysyvä intiaaniraja" jonka rikkomisesta rangaistaisiin valkoisia. Sen mukaan koko Mississipin länsipuoli olisi intiaanien. Ennen kuin laki ehdittiin saattaa voimaan olivat uudisasukkaat jo Iowassa saakka. Koska "pysyvän intiaanirajan" rikkominen oli päivittäistä keksi hallitus "ilmiselvän kohtalon". Sen mukaan eurooppalaiset oli "kohtalo" ennalta määrännyt kaitsemaan Amerikkaa. Valkoiset olivat sen mukaan "hallitseva rotu" joka oli vastuussa koko maasta. Tämä johti siihen että 27.3.1866 presidentti Johnson kieltäytyi kirjoittamasta kansalaisoikeuslakia sen epäselvyyden takia mutta 1.4. kongressi kumosi presidentin ja hyväksyi lain joka takasi kaikille Yhdysvalloissa syntyneille yhtäläiset oikeudet paitsi intiaaneille. Maahanmuuttajat saivat vallata tietyn kokoisen maa-alueen haluamastaan "vapaasta paikasta" ilmaiseksi. Rajaseudun vähäisen lainvalvonnan takia erimielisyydet ja ryöstöt yleistyivät, ja syntyi käsite ”villi länsi”. Maahanmuuttajat toivat puolestaan teollisuudelle työvoimaa ja loivat monimuotoisia yhteisöjä Amerikan kehittymättömille alueille. Kun Etelä-Dakotan Black Hills vuorilta löydettiin kultaa eivätkä intiaanit olleet halukkaita myymään pyhää aluettaan johti se yhteen viimeisistä suurista sotatoimista alueella asuvia heimoja vastaan jonka seurauksena alueen heimojen kokoamat sotajoukot tuhosivat v. 1876 kenraali Custerin joukot viimeiseen mieheen. Vuosille 1860–1880 ulottuvasta lyhyestä ajanjaksosta muodostui lopulta "Amerikan lännen kultakaudet" joista monet lännenelokuvat kertovat. Kertomukset turkiskauppiaista, vuoristojen miehistä, ratsuväestä, höyrylaivoista, kullankaivajista, intiaaneista, uudisasukkaista, lainsuojattomista, saluunoista, pyssysankareista, karjapaimenista ja postivaunuista. Tämän aikakausi tarinoineen kuuluu niihin myytteihin "jotka eivät koskaan kuole."
215 1800-luvulla tapahtui Yhdysvaltain teollistuminen. Teollistumisesta seurasi paitsi vaurastumista myös lukuisia sosiaalisia ongelmia, joita yritettiin ratkoa eri tavoin. Varsinaista parannusta tapahtui kuitenkin vasta 1930-luvulla New Dealin aikoina.
216 Venäjän keisari Aleksanteri II myi Alaskan Yhdysvalloille 9. huhtikuuta 1867 7 200 000 dollarin hinnalla. Viimeiset merkittävät aseelliset yhteenotot intiaanikansojen kanssa käytiin aavetanssi-liikkeen yhteydessä 1890. Yhdysvallat löi heikkenevän Espanjan imperiumin espanjalais-amerikkalaisessa sodassa ja Pariisin rauhansopimuksessa 10. joulukuuta 1898 Puerto Rico, Guam ja Filippiinit siirtyivät Yhdysvalloille. Samalla Espanja luopui vallastaan Kuubassa. Espanjaa vastaan tehtyyn sodanjulistukseen laadittiin senaattori Henry M. Tellerin ehdottama lisäys, joka takasi Floridansalmen eteläpuolella sijaitsevan saaren itsenäisyyden Yhdysvaltain valvonnassa.
217 Kun laajeneminen länteen oli saatettu loppuun, katseet suunnattiin Latinalaiseen Amerikkaan, jossa Yhdysvallat alkoi soveltaa taloudellista vaikutusvaltaansa. Presidentti Roosevelt otti maansa haltuun Panaman kanavan rakennushankkeen 1904.[19]
218 Yhdysvallat pysyi ensimmäisessä maailmansodassa neutraalina, kunnes se liittyi ympärysvaltoihin huhtikuussa 1917. Historiallisista ja etenkin taloudellisista syistä Yhdysvaltain sympatiat olivat brittien ja ranskalaisten puolella, mutta esimerkiksi monet irlantilaiset vastustivat interventiota.
219 Runsaassa vuodessa yhdysvaltalaiset painoivat vaa'an ympärysvaltojen voiton puolelle. Taloudellisesti maa oli ollut maailmansotaan asti velkaa muille, mutta sodan ansiosta tilanne kääntyi toisinpäin.[20]
220 Yhdysvallat liittyi toiseen maailmansotaan liittoutuneiden puolelle joulukuussa 1941, kun Japani teki yllätyshyökkäyksen Pearl Harborin laivastotukikohtaan. Yhdysvaltain ja länsiliittoutuneet aloittivat maahyökkäyksen Saksaa vastaan Normandian maihinnousulla ja Yhdysvallat lähetti materiaalia Neuvostoliiton itärintamalle. Yhdysvaltain ja Euroopan tiedemiehistä koottu ryhmä onnistui ensimmäisenä ydinpommin kehittämisessä, jonka käyttö Hiroshimassa ja Nagasakissa sai Japanin sotilasjohdon antautumaan ja lopettamaan toisen maailmansodan. Toinen maailmansota oli kallein Yhdysvaltain historiassa ja puoli miljoonaa amerikkalaista uhrasi henkensä siinä.[22] Yhdysvallat ja länsiliittoutuneet miehittivät Länsi-Saksaa, muuta Eurooppaa ja Japania kunnes uusi hallinto oli saatu kokoon. Marshall-apu kustannettiin Länsi-Euroopan uudelleenrakentamiseksi.
221 Yhdysvallat oli keskeisessä roolissa eteläisen Korean puolella Korean sodassa 1950–1953. 1957 Neuvostoliitto onnistui laukaisemaan ensimmäisenä luotaimensa, Sputnikin, Maan kiertoradalle. Tämä oli tekniseen ylivoimaansa luottaneille amerikkalaisille järkytys.[25]
222 Kylmä sota kävi kuumimmillaan, kun John F. Kennedyn kaudella tehtiin Yhdysvaltain taustatuella epäonnistunut Sikojenlahden maihinnousuyritys Kuubaan. Kuuban ohjuskriisi testasi Yhdysvaltojen ja Neuvostoliiton diplomaattisen osaamisen ääritilanteessa. Presidentti Kennedy salamurhattiin 1963.[26]
223 Toisen maailmansodan jälkeen maa koki kaupungistumisen ja korkean talouskasvun jakson. Havaijin erityisalue äänesti liittymisestä Yhdysvaltain 50. osavaltioksi vuonna 1959. Toisen maailmansodan jälkeen mustien sotilaiden osallistuminen sotaan nosti esille vaatimuksia etenkin etelävaltioiden lakiin perustuvan rotuerottelun ja -syrjinnän lopettamisesta. Amerikkalaisten, etupäässä Martin Luther Kingin, johtama kansalaisoikeusliike sai koko liittovaltion kieltämään rotuerottelun 1964 ja myöntämään kaikille äänioikeuden 1965. Yhdysvalloissa kehittyi ympäri maailmaa leviäviä alakulttuureja kuten hippikulttuuri.
224 Jimmy Carter ei presidenttinä halunnut käyttää maansa voimaa perinteiseen tapaan, mistä seurasi kommunistien valtaannousuja muun muassa Nicaraguassa ja Mosambikissa. Yhdysvaltain todellinen mahti sinänsä säilyi 1970-luvun lopullakin, mutta se ei halunnut käyttää sitä täysimääräisesti, vaan kärsi arvovaltatappioita.[28]
225 Yhdysvallat sukelsi stagflaatioon 1970-luvulla, joka huipentui Jimmy Carterin kauden inflaatioon ja massatyöttömyyteen. Ronald Reaganin kaudella aloitettu liberalisointi aloitti uuden kasvun.[29] Ulkopolitiikassa Reagan tavallaan vei loppuun Trumanin aloittaman kylmän sodan ajatuksen[30]. Vuonna 1973 intiaanisodat ja intiaanien huonot olot nousivat puheenaiheiksi kun lakotat valtasivat Wounded Kneen kylän osoittaakseen mieltään olojensa parantamiseksi. Sitä seurasi viranomaisten piiritys ja laukausten vaihtoa puolin ja toisin. Seurauksena oli ainakin kaksi kuollutta intiaania kun helikopterista avattiin tuli kirkossa olevia intiaaneja päin. Vuonna 1978 intiaaniliikkeen (AIM) jäsenet ja sadat muut intiaanit kävelivät San Franciscosta mantereen poikki Washingtoniin (The Longest Walk).
226 Eniten Yhdysvaltain puolustusvoimia tarvittiin Kuwaitin vapautuksessa Persianlahden sodassa ja sodan lopettamisessa Kosovon sodassa. Muita ulkopoliittisia kriisipisteitä olivat muun muassa Haiti, Somalia ja Liberia. Yli 3 000 ihmistä tappaneet syyskuun 11. päivän iskut järkyttivät ihmisiä Yhdysvalloissa ja muissa maissa. Iskujen seurauksena Yhdysvallat julisti terrorismin vastaisen sodan, jossa Yhdysvaltojen johtama kansainvälinen yhteisö syrjäytti Talibanin sodassa Afganistanissa. Myöhemmin Yhdysvallat ja halukkaiden koalitio syrjäytti Saddam Husseinin Irakin sodassa, mutta epäonnistuivat palauttamaan järjestyksen ja rauhoittamaan useat keskenään sotivat ryhmittymät. Irakin sodasta tuli epäsuosittu monien hallinnon asiantuntijoiden, äänestäjien ja muiden maiden keskuudessa. Myös Kiinan ja Venäjän toiminta on kuulunut ulkopoliittisiin huolenaiheisiin.
227 Presidentti Bill Clintonin kaudella Yhdysvallat näki suurimman taloudellisen kasvun maan historiassa taloudellisten linjauksien vuoksi, jotka auttoivat luomaan digitaalisen vallankumouksen ja Internetin luomat uudet toimintamahdollisuudet.[31] Talouskukoistuksen lisäksi Clinton onnistui välttämään sodat, mutta kohtasi ongelmia sisäpolitiikassa[32].
228 Yhdysvallat on perustuslaillinen tasavalta, jonka hallinto (senaatti) määritellään Yhdysvaltain perustuslaissa. Yhdysvallat koostuu 50 osavaltiosta, joilla on rajoitettu itsehallinto. Liittovaltion laki ylittää osavaltioiden lait. Osavaltioiden lainsäädännön varaan jäävät omaisuuteen, teollisuuteen ja yritystoimintaan liittyvät säädökset, rikoslaki ja työsuojelu.
229 Yhdysvaltain kongressi on liittovaltion lakeja säätävä elin. Se on kaksikamarinen ja koostuu edustajainhuoneesta ja senaatista. Edustajainhuoneeseen kuuluu 436 jäsentä ja kausi on kaksi vuotta. Senaatin kausi on kuusi vuotta ja joka toinen vuosi valitaan kolmasosa senaatista.
230 Yhdysvaltain presidentillä ja hänen hallinnollaan (toimeenpaneva hallituselin, executive) on paljon valtaa liittovaltion johtamisessa. Presidentin valitsevat osavaltioista valitut 538 valitsijamiestä neljän vuoden kaudelle. Presidenttinä on toiminut vuodesta 2009 alkaen Barack Obama.
231 Korkein lakia tulkitseva elin on Yhdysvaltain korkein oikeus, jossa on tällä hetkellä yhdeksän tuomaria.[33] Tapaoikeusjärjestelmässä (engl. Common Law) ennakkotapaukset ja lakien tulkinnat ovat tärkeässä asemassa. Oikeuslaitos käyttää myös perustuslaillista valtaa.
232 Osavaltioilla on oma perustuslaki, hallitus ja lait. Eri osavaltioiden lakien ja toimintojen välillä on usein suuria eroja esimerkiksi omaisuudenhallinnan, rikoslain, tuomioistuimien, terveydenhuollon ja koulutuksen suhteen. Jokaisen osavaltion korkein vaaleilla valittu viranomainen on kuvernööri. Jokaisessa osavaltiossa on myös vaalein valittu parlamentti, joka Nebraskaa lukuun ottamatta on kaksikamarinen.
233 Piirikunnissa (englanniiksi county, mutta Alaaskassa borough ja Louisianassa parish) on oma vaaleilla valittu valtuusto. Piirikuntia on 3 141. Ne huolehtivat esimerkiksi infrastruktuurista, poliisista, palokunnasta, hätäpalveluista, terveydenhuollosta, puistoista. Suuremmat huolehtivat myös esimerkiksi lentokentistä, satamista, rannoista, museoista ja oikeuspalveluista.
234 Kaupungit on pääasiassa muodostettu piirikuntien sisälle, ja niillä on omat hallintoelimensä. Jotkut kaupungit, kuten San Francisco ja Denver, ovat kasvaessaan yhdistäneet piirikuntaansa. Suuret kaupungit, kuten New York, Atlanta, Chicago, Dallas ja Houston, saattavat levittäytyä useamman piirikunnan alueelle. Piirikuntien ja kaupunkien roolit vaihtelevat riippuen osavaltiosta ja alueesta.
235 Korkeimman oikeuden tapauksen Worcester v. Georgia (1832) tuloksena intiaaniheimoja pidetään kansakuntina, joilla on joitakin suvereeneja oikeuksia. Intiaaniheimot toimivat itsenäisinä hallituksina liittovaltion alaisuudessa, mutta yleensä osavaltioiden vaikutuksen ulkopuolella.[34] Heimokansalaisuus (ja äänioikeus) on yleensä rajattu vain alkuperäisten heimojen jälkeläisille, mutta heimot ovat vapaita asettamaan mitä tahansa haluamiaan jäsenyysvaatimuksia.
236 Yhdysvalloissa on kaksi pääpuoluetta, republikaanit ja demokraatit. Useimmissa osavaltioissa on käytössä brittiläisissä maissa tyypillinen enemmistövaalitapa. Pääpuolueiden lisäksi itsenäiset ehdokkaat sekä kolmannet puolueet kuten vihreä puolue ja libertaaripuolue ovat keränneet äänestäjiä paikallisvaaleissa, mutta liittovaltion tasolla vain yksi pääpuolueiden ulkopuolinen ehdokas pitää nykyisin senaattorin, kongressiedustajan tai kuvernöörin paikkaa.
237 Yhdysvaltalaiset pääpuolueet ovat poliittiselta spektriltään laajempia kuin eurooppalaiset vastineensa – niitä voi pitää lähinnä vaaliorganisaatioiksi rakennettuina ”sateenvarjo-organisaatioina”, joilla ei ole yhteistä ohjelmaa ja yhteistä aatetta, yhdestä johtajasta puhumattakaan. Yhdysvalloissa järjestetään liittovaltio-, osavaltio- ja paikallistason äänestyksiä jatkuvasti ja edustajien lisäksi äänestyslipuissa kysytään yleensä lukuisia muita kysymyksiä.
238 Yhdysvaltain suuri taloudellinen, poliittinen ja sotilaallinen vaikutus on tehnyt maan ulkopolitiikasta hyvin tarkkaan seuratun ja kiistellyn ympäri maailmaa. Yhdysvalloilla on yksi maailman laajimmista kansainvälisistä suhdeverkostoista. Lähes jokaisessa maassa on Yhdysvaltain edustusto ja näillä puolestaan oma edustustonsa Washingtonissa. Erään mielipidekyselyn mukaan amerikkalaisten mielestä heidän lähimmät liittolaisensa ovat Britannia, Kanada, Australia, Israel ja Japani.[35] Yhdysvallat on perustajäsen Yhdistyneissä kansakunnissa, G8-ryhmässä, Maailman kauppajärjestössä, Kansainvälisessä valuuttarahastossa, NAFTAssa, Pohjois-Atlantin puolustusliitto Natossa, Tyynenmeren puolustusliitossa ANZUSissa, APECissa ja monissa muissa kansainvälisissä järjestöissä.
239 Yhdysvallat isännöi Yhdistyneiden kansakuntien päämajaa, joka toimii kansainvälisellä alueella New Yorkissa.[36] Vuonna 2006 verorahoista lähetettiin kehitysapuna 23,5 miljardia dollaria. Verorahoista lähetetty apu oli absoluuttisesti suurempi kuin millään muulla valtiolla, mutta suhteellisesti sen antama kehitysapu oli teollisuusmaiden pienimpiä (vain 0,18 % bruttokansantulosta). Kun yksityishenkilöiden lähettämä kehitysapu lasketaan mukaan, Yhdysvallat lähetti kehitysapuna peräti 192 miljardia dollaria, mikä oli absoluuttisesti maailman suurin ja bruttokansantuloon suhteutettuna kuudenneksi suurin luku.[37]
240 Vapaaehtoiset hakeutuvat töihin tai reserviin Yhdysvaltain puolustusvoimiin. Yhdysvaltain asevoimiin kuuluu yhteensä 1,4 miljoonaa palveluksessa olevaa henkilöä[39] sekä muutama satatuhatta henkilöä reservissä ja kansalliskaartissa. Kansalliskaarti kuuluu sekä armeijan (Army National Guard) että ilmavoimien alaisuuteen (Air National Guard). Kansalliskaartin joukot käsittävät noin puolet armeijan taistelujoukoista ja kolmanneksen sen huoltojoukoista. Kansalliskaartin joukot palvelevat kaksi viikkoa vuodessa ja sitoutuvat työskentelemään puolustusvoimille tarpeen vaatiessa.
241 Yhdysvaltain puolustusvoimilla on puolustusyhteistyösopimukset useiden maiden kanssa ja ovat vahvasti läsnä muun muassa Tyynenmeren saarilla, Japanissa, Etelä-Koreassa, Taiwanissa, Afghanistanissa, Irakissa, Saksassa, muualla Euroopassa ja Atlantilla. Yhdysvalloilla on yhteensä 702 sotilastukikohtaa 132 eri maassa ja kaikilla mantereilla paitsi Etelämantereella.[40] Yhdysvalloilla on toiseksi eniten ydinaseita Venäjän jälkeen ja sillä on ydinasejakosopimukset Euroopan maiden kuten Saksan ja Alankomaiden kanssa.[41] Yhdysvaltain puolustusmenot ovat maailman suurimmat ja omassa kokoluokassaan muodostaen 4 prosentin osuuden kansantuotteesta.[42]
242 Yhdysvaltain kokonaisala on 9 826 630 km², josta maa-alaa on 9 161 923 km² ja vesialaa 664 707 km².[1] Pinta-alaltaan maailman kolmanneksi suurimpana valtiona[43] ja koko Pohjois-Amerikan mantereen levyisenä Yhdysvaltain maantiede vaihtelee suuresti: Floridan mangrovemetsistä maan keskiosan suurille tasangoille ja Mississippi–Missouri-jokijärjestelmään. Tasankojen länsipuolella nousevat Kalliovuoret. Niiden länsipuolella on aavikkoja, tasankoja ja Tyynenmeren rannikon välimerellinen ilmastovyöhyke, luoteessa jopa sademetsät. Erillinen Alaska on pääasiassa arktista aluetta ja Havaiji vulkaaninen saariryhmä.
243 Keskilännestä länteen levittäytyvät Suuret tasangot. Suuri osa maan maataloustuotteista kasvatetaan tällä alueella. Alue muodostuu enimmäkseen suurista, raskaasti viljellystä ja erittäin tasaisesta ruohomaasta. Suuret tasangot päättyvät Kalliovuoriin. Kalliovuoret muodostavat suuren osan läntisestä Yhdysvalloista, lähtien Kanadasta ja jatkuen lähes Meksikoon asti. Kalliovuoret muodostuvat pääasiassa melko loivista rinteistä ja matalista huipuista verrattuna muihin suuriin vuoristojonoihin, paitsi muutama poikkeus (kuten Tetonvuoret Wyomingissa ja Sawatch-jono Coloradossa). Lisäksi sen sijaan että se olisi jatkuva ja yhtenäinen vuoristojono, se rikkoutuu useisiin pienempiin, välillisiin vuoristojonoihin, muodostaen laaksojen ja ylänköjen sarjoja.
244 Lounais-Yhdysvallat on matalaa aavikkoa. Osa-alue, joka tunnetaan nimellä Colorado Plateau ja joka sijaitsee Four Corners -alueella, on erikoinen maastoltaan. Se sisältää monia kansallispuistoja kuten Grand Canyon, Arches ja Bryce Canyon.
245 Alaskassa on Yhdysvaltojen jylhimmät maisemat. Korkeat, valtavat vuoret nousevat terävästi laajoilta, tasaisilta tundra-aukioilta. Etelä- ja lounaisrannikon saarilla on useita tulivuoria. Havaiji, kaukana Alaskasta etelään Tyynellä valtamerellä, on ketju trooppisia tuliperäisiä saaria ja suosittu turistikohde.
246 Suuren kokonsa ja maantieteellisen monimuotoisuutensa vuoksi Yhdysvalloissa esiintyvät lähes kaikki ilmastotyypit. Päävaikutus Yhdysvaltain ilmastoon on napa-alueen ilmavirralla, joka tuo matalapainejärjestelmät pohjoiselta Tyyneltämereltä.
247 Yhdysvaltojen etelä-osissa ilmasto on aina suhteellisen lämmin, joten kasvillisuuskin on sen mukaista. Havaijilla kasvillisuus on paratiisimaisen rehevää ja ilmasto aina trooppinen ja kostea. Mantereella, itärannikon eteläisissä osavaltioissa, kuten Floridassa, Alabamassa, Etelä-Carolinassa ja Georgiassa kasvaa kosteahkoja subtrooppisia ainavihantia havu-ja lehtimetsiä, jotka saavat runsaasti sateita kesäaikaan. Floridan eteläkärki lähellä Miamia on enimmäkseen suota, Evergladesia. Siellä elää muun muassa alligaattoreita sekä uhanalainen floridanpuuma. Aina Pohjois-Carolinasta ja Tennesseestä Kanadan rajalle saakka kasvillisuus on lauhkeaa lehtimetsää, tosin lähes mitään siitä ei ole enää jäljellä. Merkittävin suojeltu metsäalue löytyy Appalakeilta. Lehtimetsien tyypillisimpiä puita Amerikassa ovat tammet, jalopähkinät, sokerivaahterat, hevoskastanjat ja hikkorit. Joitakin havupuitakin löytyy, kuten hemlokki ja marjakuusi. Ne eivät ole kuitenkaan varsinaisia havumetsälajeja. Eläimistöstä löytyvät niin harmaaorava, opossumi, haisunäätä, kuin siili ja pesukarhukin. Lännempänä, Mississipin länsipuolella metsä vaihettuu preeriaksi. Preerioilla elää vielä joitain suuria nisäkkäitä, kuten biisoneita ja hanka-antilooppeja, sekä pienempiä kuten preeriakoiria. Kuitenkin suurin osa entisistä preerioista on nykyään maanviljelyn käytössä. Edelleen lännempänä Kalliovuorilla kasvaa vuoriston havumetsiä, joissa kasvaa jokseenkin erityyppiset puulajit, kuin varsinaisissa pohjoisissa havumetsissä. Vielä lännempänä, Kalliovuorten ja Kaskadivuorten väliin jäävillä alangoilla on kylmiä aavikkoisia ylänkötasankoja, jotka sijaitsevat sadekatveessa, kun sateet satavat joko lännessä Kaskadivuorten rinteille, tyynenmeren rannikolle, tai idässä Kalliovuorille. Laskeuduttaessa tästä etelämmäs Coloradojoen laaksoon, ilmastokin lämpenee ja Sonoran puoliaavikoilla kasvaa runsaasti subtrooppisia kaktuksia, piikkipensaita ja eräitä yksivuotisia kukkalajeja, jotka itävät ja kukkivat muutamassa päivässä, kun Sonoran aavikko saa mahdollisesti joitakin sateita kesäaikaan. Tällöin kuiva Sonoran autiomaa muuttuu pariksi viikoksi kukkamereksi, ennen kuin kuiva hiekkainen tunnelma valtaa sen taas pitkäksi ajaksi.
248 Koko länsirannikolla suurin osa sateista saadaan talvella, loka-maaliskuussa. Pohjoisessa etelää runsaammin. Eteläosien lämpimimmillä ja kuivemmilla alueilla Kaliforniassa kasvillisuus on nahkealehtistä välimerenkasvillisuutta pensastoineen ja metsineen ja vuoristossa kasvaa eräänlaisiksi havumetsiksi luettavia punapuumetsiä 1400–300 metrin korkeudella. Kun rannikkoa edetään pohjoiseen Oregonin ja Washingtonin osavaltioihin, kasvillisuus muuttuu lauhkeaksi sademetsäksi. Alueella sataa noin 4 metriä vuodessa mikä on Suomeen verrattuna viisinkertaisesti enemmän. Sateet satavat rannikolla Kaskadivuorten rinteille, mutta vuorten takana on kuivempaa, jopa aavikkoa. Tällä sateisella rannikkoalueella talvet ovat leutoja, mutta kesätkään eivät ole mitenkään erityisen lämpimiä. Alueella kasvaa pääosin lehti ja havupuustoa. Monet havupuut, kuten jättiläiskuusi, sitkankuusi ja jättituija kasvavat kunnioitettaviin mittoihin. Näiden aluspuustona kasvaa lehtipuita, kuten viinivaahteraa, isolehtivaahteraa ja tammea. Alueen kasvillisuuden tunnistettava ominaisuus suurten havupuiden lisäksi on runsas sammal- ja sanikkaiskerros puiden rungoilla, mikä kertoo kosteista olosuhteista.
249 Pohjoisempana, Alaskan etelärannikolla on vielä suhteellisen lauhkeaa ja runsas sateista. Alaskan etelärannikolla onkin boreaalisia sademetsiä. Niissä puulajit ovat samoja kuin pohjoisella havumetsävyöhykkeellä Amerikassa yleensäkin, eli kuusia, koivuja, mäntyjä, pihtoja. Sademäärä vain on poikkeuksellisen suuri. Alaskan sisämaassa on tyypillisempiä boreaalisia havumetsiä ja Alaskan pohjoisrannikolla se vaihettuu tundraksi.
250 Yhdysvallat kokee myös maailman säännöllisimmät ja voimakkaimmat tornadot maailmassa. Suuret tasangot kokevat vastakkaisten ilmamassojen vuoksi vakavia ukkosmyrskyjä ja tornadoja keväällä ja kesällä. Maa pohjoisesta Texasista kohti pohjoista Kansasta ja itään Tennesseehen tunnetaan Tornado Alleyna, jossa monissa taloissa on tornadosuojat ja monilla kylillä on tornadosireenit.
251 USA (svenska: Amerikas förenta stater, Nordamerikas förenta stater eller Förenta staterna) är en förbundsrepublik i centrala Nordamerika. Landet sträcker sig från Atlanten i öster till Stilla havet i väster, gränsar mot Kanada i norr och Mexiko i söder samt har en maritim gräns mot Ryssland i nordväst. Dessutom innehar landet fjorton territorier och besittningar i Karibien och Oceanien.
252 USA består av 50 delstater samt huvudstadsområdet District of Columbia. Delstaten Hawaii är en ögrupp i Stilla havet, medan resterande 49 stater är belägna i Nordamerika. Alaska i nordvästra Nordamerika är skilt från övriga stater och gränsar till Kanada. Uttrycket kontinentala USA (continental U.S.) omfattar strikt logiskt alla stater utom Hawaii, men av tradition exkluderas vanligen även Alaska.
253 Unionen grundades den 4 juli 1776 då tretton brittiska kolonier utropade sin självständighet. Året före hade stridigheter utbrutit mellan brittiska kolonialtrupper och självständighetsivrare i vad som kallas det amerikanska frihetskriget. Unionens egenskap av en odelbar förbundsrepublik fastställdes först genom det amerikanska inbördeskriget.
254 Efter Sovjetunionens sammanbrott åren kring 1990 blev USA världens enda supermakt och har en särställning vad det gäller ekonomiskt, politiskt, militärt och populärkulturellt inflytande. Till exempel kan det nämnas att landets militärbudget är större än de tio närmast största militärmakterna tillsammans (2003) och att dess BNP utgör en femtedel av världens totala produktion (2005). Befolkningsmässigt är det världens tredje största land och till ytan är det också världens tredje största land om man räknar med alla öar och territorier USA har i de olika världshaven.
255 Utöver de 50 delstaterna som USA består av lyder även följande områden direkt under den federala regeringen: Amerikanska Jungfruöarna, Amerikanska Samoa, District of Columbia, Guam och Puerto Rico. Den totala landytan för Kontinentala USA uppgår ungefär till 1,9 miljarder acres. Alaska som är avskilt genom Kanada från Kontinentala USA, är den störta delstaten på 365 miljoner acres. Ögruppen- och delstaten Hawaii i centrala Stilla havet, sydväst om Nordamerika utgör något över fyra miljoner acres.[2] Efter Ryssland och Kanada är USA till ytan världens tredje och fjärde största nation, rankad precis före och efter Kina. Rankingen varierar beroende på hur de två av Kina och Indien omdiskuterade territorier räknas och hur den totala ytan i USA beräknas: CIA:s World Factbook säger 9 826 630 km²,[3] FN:s statistiska avdelning säger 9 629 091 km²,[4] och Encyclopedia Britannica säger 9 522 055 km².[5] Räknat till enbart landyta är USA den tredje största nationen efter Ryssland och Kina, precis före Kanada.[6]
256 Kustslätterna längst atlantkusten ger med sig längre inlands åt de lövfällande skogarna och det kuperade landskapet i regionen Piedmont. Appalacherna delar den östra kusten från Stora sjöarna och grässlätterna i Mellanvästern. Mississippi–Missourifloden, världens fjärde längsta flodsystem, rinner huvudsakligen i nord-sydlig riktning genom landets hjärta. Den platta och bördiga prärien Great Plains sträcker ut sig mot väst, medan i sydöst återfinns en bergsregion. Klippiga bergen vid den västra kanten av Great Plains, sträcker sig från norr till syd genom landet, med en höjd på över 4 300 meter i Colorado. Längre västerut ligger den torra regionen Great Basin och öknar som Mojave. Sierra Nevada och Kaskadbergen sträcker sig längst stillahavskusten. Med sina 6 194 meter är Alaskas Mount McKinley landets högsta topp. Aktiva vulkaner är vanliga i Alexanderarkipelagen och Aleuterna i Alaska, och Hawaii består av vulkanöar. Supervulkanen som ligger under Yellowstone nationalpark i Klippiga bergen är kontinentens största .[7]
257 USA med sina stora yta och sin geografiska variation finns de flesta klimattyper. Öster om 100:e meridianen varierar klimatet från ett fuktigt kontinentalklimat i norr till ett fuktigt subtropiskt klimat i syd. Den södra änden av Florida är tropisk liksom Hawaii. Great Plains, väster om 100:e meridianen har ett halvtorrt klimat. Mycket av bergen i väster har bergsklimat. Klimatet är torrt i Great Basin, öknen i sydväst, medelhavsklimat lägst kaliforniakusten, kustklimat längst med Oregon och Washington och södra Alaska. Mestadels av Alaska har ett subarktiskt klimat. Extremväder är inte ovanligt i USA—delstaterna som gränsar till Mexikanska golfen är utsatta för orkaner och de flesta av världens största tornados förekommer inom landets gränser, huvudsakligen i Mellanvästerns Tornado Alley.[8]
258 USA:s ekologi är väldigt skiftande: ungefär 17 000 arter av kärlväxter finns i kontinentala USA och Alaska, och över 1 800 arter gömfröväxter finns på Hawaii, få av dem finns på fastlandet.[9] USA är hem för mer än 400 olika däggdjur, 750 fågelarter och 500 reptiler och amfibiska arter.[10] Ungefär 91 000 insektsarter har beskrivits.[11] Endangered Species Act från 1973 skyddar hotade och utsatta arter och deras naturliga miljö, som övervakas av United States Fish and Wildlife Service. Det finns 58 nationalparker i USA och hundratals andra federala skötta parker, skogar och vildmarker.[12] Allt som allt äger staten 28,8% av landets yta.[13] Det mesta av detta är skyddad mark, dock arrenderas en del av detta ut till användning för olje- och gasborrning, gruvdrift, skogsavverkning eller boskapsfarmar; 2,4% används för militära ändamål.[13]
259 Den 19 april 1775 letade brittiska trupper efter en vapengömma och en lokal ledare i trakten av Boston, när de plötsligt hamnade i konflikt med en stor lokal milis. Britterna retirerade till Boston och utsattes på vägen för krypskyttar. Denna konfrontation, som kom efter flera års eskalerande meningsskiljaktigheter mellan det amerikanska kolonialstyret och det brittiska parlamentet, innebar början på den amerikanska revolutionen. Efter ett års krig utropade de 13 brittiska kolonierna sig självständiga och efter att de ingått en allians med Frankrike blev situationen ohållbar för britterna och ett fredsfördrag kunde slutas 1783. I fredsfördraget erkände Storbritannien sina gamla nordamerikanska koloniers självständighet.
260 År 1789 trädde den amerikanska konstitutionen i kraft och George Washington tillträdde som USA:s förste president. Landet slets i sin början mellan att hålla sig neutralt, stödja fransmännen som hade hjälpt dem till självständighet, eller stödja britterna som de trots allt delade språk och kultur med. 1812 hamnade dock USA i ett nytt krig med Storbritannien, orsakat av att den brittiska flottan hade inlett en blockad av franska hamnar, vilket störde den amerikanska handeln med Europa.
261 Under 1800-talet skedde en mängd betydelsefulla saker; landet expanderade kraftigt västerut, flera krig utkämpades mot landets urinvånare (se indiankrigen), miljontals fattiga européer emigrerade till USA, miljontals afrikanska slavar importerades till jordbruket i södern, och det amerikanska inbördeskriget bröt ut efter mitten av århundradet.
262 Expansionen bestod av både krigföring och regelrätta köp av landområden från kolonialmakterna Storbritannien, Frankrike, Spanien och Ryssland. Texas, som varit en självständig republik från 1836 då den bröt sig fri från Mexiko, gick med i USA 1845. Åren 1846 - 1848 utkämpades ett krig mot Mexiko, det så kallade mexikanska kriget, vilket ledde till att Kalifornien, Nevada och Utah samt delar av Arizona, Colorado, Wyoming och New Mexico erövrades. I väster köptes och erövrades indianernas marker, främst kring 1870-talet, vilka under denna tid sakta men säkert marginaliserades och i vissa fall utrotades, och vid århundradets slut var de överlevande stammarna infösta i reservat belägna på platser som ansågs sakna ekonomiskt värde.
263 Samtidigt vällde europeiska immigranter in i landet. Mestadels var det fattiga från europeisk landsbygd och stad, vilka inte kunde livnära sig väl på de allt trängre markerna i sina hemländer. Många var även religiöst fritänkande som blev trakasserade i sina hemländer och andra var kriminella som emigrerade för att fly undan rättvisan. De största grupperna kom från Tyskland, Irland och Storbritannien. De fann ofta goda utkomstmöjligheter i USA, som var i behov av jordbrukare för att odla upp de nyerövrade områdena, och arbetskraft i den snabbt växande industrin.
264 Under 1800-talets första hälft blomstrade den amerikanska södern. I sydstaterna odlades bomull på jättelika plantager och man använde slavar som arbetskraft. Slavarna bestod av afrikaner som togs till fånga i sina hemländer och användes som billig arbetskraft för det slitsamma arbetet. Miljoner afrikaner kom till USA på det viset och idag utgör deras ättlingar cirka 12 % av den totala amerikanska befolkningen. I nordstaterna växte däremot starka industrier fram. Sydstaternas odlingsekonomi och nordstaternas industri ledde till en klyfta som kulminerade i det amerikanska inbördeskriget 1861-1865. En viktig fråga i kriget var slaveriets vara eller icke vara; nordstaterna ville på sikt avskaffa det då det ej var lämpligt för industriarbete och därför att den etiska opinionen mot slaveriet växte, medan sydstaterna ville bevara det. Motsättningen ledde till att sydstaterna försökte bryta sig ur federationen, men blev besegrade av nordstaterna i det blodiga krig som krävde runt 650 000 liv.
265 I slutet av 1800-talet hade USA blivit en av de ledande industrinationerna, mycket tack vare sin stora yta och sina omfattande naturtillgångar. Under denna tid slog landets utrikespolitik in på ett imperiebyggande spår, vilket bland annat ledde till krig med Spanien 1898. USA valde dock till en början att stå utanför första världskriget, men gick med i kriget när en tysk ubåt sänkte en brittisk båt med amerikanska passagerare 1915 (Lusitania). Det amerikanska folket var efter kriget besviket över dess utgång, och opinionen krävde att politiken hädanefter skulle tvingas in på en mer isolationistisk linje.
266 Den isolationistiska linjen ledde till att USA valde att stå utanför även andra världskriget. De gick inte in i kriget förrän Japan 1941, utan att förklara krig, attackerade flottbasen Pearl Harbor på Hawaii. Efter andra världskriget drogs USA in i en långdragen konflikt med Sovjetunionen, kallad det kalla kriget. Konflikten ledde aldrig till öppet krig utan utkämpades främst på en industriell nivå där USA:s överlägsna industrikapacitet till sist knäckte Sovjetunionen i den rustningskamp som fördes. Kampen fördes dock även indirekt genom att de två nationerna gav stöd till konflikter inom och mellan andra länder. Sedan Sovjetunionens fall är USA världens enda supermakt, vilket lett till att landet på ett mer aktivt sätt kan påverka omvärlden, bland annat genom att 2003 invadera Irak och avsätta dess diktator Saddam Hussein.
267 USA är en federation (union) med ett republikanskt statsskick med full presidentialism. Det innebär att de 50 delstaterna har ett visst självbestämmande, som generellt sett sträcker sig till angelägenheter som går att isolera inom delstatens gränser, och innefattar rättigheten att stifta lagar i de inre angelägenheterna så länge som lagarna inte bryter mot den federala konstitutionen. Det finns alltså en delning mellan vad som anses ligga på delstatsnivå och den federala nivån, som är det som berör hela nationen. Exempel på angelägenheter som tillhör delstaterna: infrastrukturen inom delstaten, reglering av byggmarknaden och industrin, företagande och kollektivtrafiken samt arbetsmiljöfrågor. Straffrätten regleras framför allt av delstaterna, men vissa brott - bland annat de som riktar sig mot federala tjänstemän och tillgångar - beivras av det federala rättsväsendet.
268 På den statliga nivån finns presidenten och dennes regering (ofta används ordet administration istället för regering - begränsat enbart till de personer som sitter i regeringen används uttrycket kabinett liksom i Storbritannien), kongressen (senaten och representanthuset) och högsta domstolen som grenar av den federala makten. En president och dennes regering i USA sitter i fyra år och presidenten kan endast bli omvald en gång.
269 USA:s konstitution (grundlag) stadgar makten hos politikerna, de lagstiftande och rättsväsendet. Grundlagen ger även folket rätt till yttrandefrihet, rätt att utan inskränkningar av den federala regeringen inneha vapen, religionsfrihet, rätt till rättegång med jury samt skydd mot grymma och ovanliga straff. De tre stora institutionerna – kongressen, presidenten och Högsta domstolen – förvaltar och ser till att lagarna efterföljs. De övervakar också varandra för att förhindra brott inom regeringen och stärka demokratin.
270 Kongressen, som består av Representanthuset och Senaten, är den lagstiftande institutionen. Representanthuset (som skall representera unionens människor) består av 435 folkvalda medlemmar kallade kongresskvinnor/män. Befolkningsstorlek avgör hur många representanter varje delstat får. USA:s senat (som skall representera unionens delstater) består av 100 senatorer. Varje delstat har två senatorer som väljs i perioder på sex år.
271 De federala domstolarna i USA används endast när det är federala eller konstitutionella frågor. Landets högsta domstol består av 9 stycken av presidenten utnämnda domare.
272 Amnesty International har kritiserat USA för att undergräva respekten för mänskliga rättigheter. Andra punkter som Amnesty lyft fram är användandet av tortyr mot fångar (bland annat dog 70 fångar av elchocker 2007) och att man håller fångar utan anklagelse om brott eller rättegång. Dessutom kritiseras man för användandet av dödsstraff och att man ignorerar krav från FN:s människorättskommissioner.[14]
273 USA har även kritiserats och anklagats för att bryta mot internationella arbetslivsnormer. International Labour Organization, FN:s fackorgan, kritiserade 1991 USA i samband med en strejk anordnad av Caterpillar-anställda. Regeringen tillät bolaget att ta in strejkbrytare under strejken, vilket ledde till att de strejkande förlorade sina jobb. Organisationen hävdade att detta urholkade strejkrätten och skrev att denna rätt inte är "really guaranteed when a worker who exercises it legally runs the risk of seeing his or her job taken up permanently by another worker, just as legally". Man gjorde även en internationell jämförelse som visade att endast Sydafrika hade samma dåliga arbetsvillkor under tidpunkten för konflikten.[15] Av de återvändande strejkande arbetarna blev omkring 150 av med sina arbeten medan resten möttes av en åtta veckors provanställningsperiod. I samband med strejken fick det ansvariga fackförbundet United Auto Workers kritik från sina medlemmar för att de givit upp de krav som ursprungligen ställdes i konflikten.[16]
274 USA är en förbundsstat där den federala och den delstatliga makten är strängt delad enligt konstitutionen. Därför är också den federala polisen rigoröst åtskild från den delstatliga, och den federala polisen kan endast verka inom de områden som faller inom federal jurisdiktion, medan den delstatliga polisen saknar befogenhet att bekämpa federala brott eller brott i andra delstater.
275 De flesta poliser verkar inom den delstatliga jurisdiktionens område. År 2000 fanns det 95 673 federala poliser, men 718 736 poliser som verkade inom ramen för en delstatlig jurisdiktion. Inom den delstatliga jurisdiktionen finns det poliser på central delstatlig nivå (statspolis), countynivå (sheriffer) och lokal nivå (kommunal polis). Av dessa är den lokala nivån störst med 443 550 poliser år 2000. Detta gör också att det finns ett mycket stort antal polismyndigheter i USA. År 2000 fanns det 17 784 polismyndigheter inom den delstatliga jurisdiktionens område.
276 En kapitalistisk modell ligger till grund för det ekonomiska systemet i USA, där de arketypiska dragen historiskt varit en stadig tillväxt, låg arbetslöshet, låg inflation, en stor tjänstesektor, ett stort handelsunderskott, en stark dollar och en snabb teknisk utveckling. Den amerikanska ekonomin utgör navet för hela världsekonomin. Flera länder har sina valutor kopplade till dollarn (eller använder till och med den som sin egen valuta), de flesta råvaror handlas med dollar på den internationella marknaden, och börserna i USA ses globalt som en indikator på världsekonomins tillstånd.
277 USA är ett av världens rikaste länder och landets BNP gör landets ekonomi till den i särklass största i världen. År 2006 var landets BNP drygt 13,1 biljoner dollar. Välståndet är emellertid ojämnt fördelat och 12,3 procent av befolkningen lever under fattigdomsgränsen.[18] Observera att USA:s fattigdomsgräns är en helt annan än den internationella. I USA räknas man som fattig om man har en inkomst under $10210. [1] Bland de fattiga är afro-amerikaner, indianer och spansktalande kraftigt överrepresenterade. USA:s socialförsäkringssystem litar mer på marknadslösningar än offentligt finansierade trygghetssystem. Dock är USA:s viktigaste och mest heltäckande socialförsäkring social security, som infördes i mitten av 1930-talet, ett federalt finansierat pensionssystem. Förutom ålderspensionärer omfattar detta system även handikappade, arbetsskadade, föräldralösa barn samt änkor och änklingar.
278 Det finns stora tillgångar av naturresurser i USA, bland annat kol, petroleum, uran och skog. USA är världens tredje största oljeproducent [2], efter Saudiarabien och Ryssland men oljeproduktionen har sedan länge varit på nedgång. Den årliga produktionen hade sin topp på 1970-talet (omkring hälften av den tillgängliga oljan var då utvunnen) och landets ekonomi blir allt mer beroende av importerad olja. De stora stäpperna i centrala delar av landet är hem för gigantiska jordbruk, vilket gör USA till världens största producent av till exempel majs, vete, socker, tobak, energi och vattenkraft .
279 USA:s största handelspartner är dess nordliga granne, Kanada, som tillsammans med USA:s sydliga granne Mexiko ingår med USA i frihandelsavtalet North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA). Andra viktiga handelspartners är EU och Asien (Japan, Kina och Sydkorea). USA har dock ett betydande underskott i handelsbalansen, vilket 2003 fortsatte att öka till 43,1 miljarder dollar, trots den kraftiga försvagningen av dollarn som då skedde. En viktig faktor till det växande handelsunderskottet är det allt större behovet av importerad olja.
280 Utöver det stora handelsunderskottet har den amerikanska ekonomin i nuläget problem med ett stort underskott i statsfinanserna. Landet hade i början av 2004 en statsskuld på 7 112 miljarder dollar, vilket ger en skuld på runt 24 000 dollar per invånare. Detta kan jämföras med Sveriges som vid samma period utgjorde runt 17 000 dollar per person. Läget ser inte heller ut att förbättras under 2004 då ett rekordstort underskott i budgeten väntas. Idag 2008 är läget sämre med skulder på över 8 700 miljarder dollar [3] (65,4% av BNP), drygt 27 000 dollar per invånare. Landet har år efter år lyckats finansiera ut detta enorma underskott med hjälp av stora investeringar som görs i landet bland annat från Europa och Japan.
281 En majoritet av de 300 miljoner invånarna är ättlingar till immigranter från Europa, varav det stora flertalet härstammar från Tyskland, England, Skottland, Irland och Italien. Många immigranter kom även från de nordiska och slaviska länderna. Invånarna med franskt och spanskt ursprung immigrerade oftast från Franska Kanada respektive Mexiko och Syd- och Mellanamerika.
282 Den latinamerikanska befolkningsgruppen, som är den största minoritetsgruppen i landet och utgjorde 13,4 % av befolkningen 2002 (38,6 miljoner människor), är också den snabbast växande gruppen, och därför har det spanska språket också ökat i betydelse. År 2000 utgjordes runt 12% av befolkningen av afroamerikaner vilka nästan uteslutande härstammar från de afrikanska slavar som fördes till Amerika under 1700- och 1800-talet. Den tredje i storlek betydande befolkningsgruppen är de av asiatiskt ursprung, vilka utgör 3,6 % av befolkningen och främst är koncentrerade till de västra delarna av landet. Ursprungsbefolkningen som levde i området före den europeiska kolonisationen för idag en tynande tillvaro och utgör under 1% av befolkningen.
283 USA:s fördelning över religionssjamfund var 2001 fölsjande; protestanter 52%, katoliker 24,5%, obundna 13,2%, judar 1,3% och övriga 0,5-0,3% (vilket bland annat innefattar muslimer, buddhister, ateister och hinduer).[källa behövs] Anmärkningsvärt är att antalet människor som ser sig som kristna faller snabbt, från 86,2% 1990 till 76,5% 2001.[källa behövs] Många av dessa har istället gått över till nyandliga filosofier som inte kan anses vara religioner på samma sätt som till exempel kristendomen (dessa ingår i benämningen obundna i fördelningsstatistiken ovan)
284 Landet präglas av etnisk och kulturell mångfald. En stor del av landets tillgångar kontrolleras av en liten del av befolkningen. 1993, efter recessionen i början av 1990-talet, nåddes en topp i antalet fattiga i USA men därefter fick de flesta grupper det bättre under flera år och år 2000 var andelen fattiga i USA de lägsta sedan 1970-talet, 11,3 procent eller 31,1 miljoner (se diagram).[23] Mellan år 2000 och år 2004 ökade dock fattigdomen till 12,7 procent. Därefter har den minskat något till år 2006, då 12,3 procent eller 36,5 miljoner amerikaner beräknades vara fattiga.[18] USA:s befolkning ökade samtidigt från 248 miljoner till 299 miljoner invånare mellan 1990 och 2006.[24] I relation till andra länder ligger dock den generella levnadsstandarden över världssnittet. 69% av invånarna hade tillgång till internet år 2006.[25] Vidare ägde år 2002 67,9% av befolkningen sitt eget hem.[källa behövs]
285 USA har inget officiellt språk, vilket beror på att engelska har varit totalt dominerande, varför det ansetts att man ej behöver ett officiellt språk.[källa behövs] I takt med att antalet spansktalande invandrare från Latinamerika, hispanics, ökade under andra hälften av 1900-talet, och dessa i större utsträckning än tidigare invandrargrupper har valt att inte övergå till att prata engelska, så har kraven på att engelska skall införas som officiellt språk i USA ökat. Delstatliga försök till sådan lagstiftning har dock underkänts av de federala domstolarna.
286 Den amerikanska populärkulturen har en stark påverkan på resten av världen, i synnerhet västvärlden. Musik, filmer och TV-serier exporteras i stor skala. Till exempel gick 62,5% av alla svenska biobesök till en amerikansk film år 2001, trots att de bara utgjorde 35,3% av alla filmer som gick upp på svenska biografer. Denna kulturella påverkan är dock relativt ny och kan spåras tillbaka till första hälften av 1900-talet, vid Hollywoods och ungdomskulturens framväxt. Innan dess sågs USA, i förhållande till Europa och Asien, som ett kulturellt efterblivet jordbruksland utan någon rik kulturell grund. Den amerikanska livsstilen med snabbmat och högt beroende av motorfordon är också ett kulturellt drag som påverkat omvärlden.
287 Den huvudsakliga matlagningen i USA liknar den i Europa. Vete är det mest använda sädesslaget. Traditionella amerikanska maträtter kan vara t.ex. kalkon, hjort, potatis, majs m.m. Många maträtter kom med invandringen från Europa runt slutet av 1800-talet, så som friterad kyckling, pizza hamburgare och varmkorv. Många rätter finns även kvar från Indianerna. Fläskkött, nötkött, ”crab cakes”, potatischips och ”chocolate chip cookies” tillsammans med snabbmaten, är mycket vanligt i USA. Bland afroamerikaner och i södra USA är så kallad Soul food vanlig. Den infördes under triangelhandeln runt 1600-talet.
288 Sedan 1920-talet har USA dominerat den globala filmindustrin med ett brett utbud av filmer som varit både konstnärligt och tekniskt banbrytande. Detta har bidragit till att det i den amerikanska kulturen finns en ingrodd filmentusiasm som inte kan hittas någon annanstans än kanske den andra stora filmnationen, Indien (se indisk film). Men till skillnad från den indiska filmindustrin har den amerikanska varit framgångsrik runt hela världen.
289 Televisionen är en viktig del av vardagen i USA. 99 procent av alla amerikanska hushåll har minst en tv-apparat och majoriteten av dem har fler än en. Den amerikanska televisionen domineras och präglas helt av kommersiella bolag men det finns också en public service-kanal (PBS). Dock har en staligt styrd public service-kanal aldrig existerat.
290 De större amerikanska tv-kanalerna (och radiostationerna) är uppbyggda av så kallade "nätverk" (network), alltså ett övergripande företag som producerar program som sedan visas av regionala stationer med oberoende ägare. Den amerikanska tv-marknaden dominerades länge av National Broadcasting Company, American Broadcasting Company och Columbia Broadcasting System, men har från 1980-talet fått konkurrens från andra nätverk såsom Fox Broadcasting Company samt kabel-tv-kanaler.
291 De flesta barn börjar skolan i kindergarten som fem- eller sexåringar och slutar skolan i artonårsåldern efter deras sista år på High School. Vissa delstater tillåter eleverna att sluta skolan vid sextonårsåldern. Efter High School väljer många att studera vidare på universitet. I skolan undervisas det bland annat i matematik, historia, engelska, gymnastik och naturvetenskapliga ämnen samt flera självständiga val i High School. Omkring 85 procent av barnen i USA går i allmänna skolor, och många föräldrar väljer att sända barnen till privata skolor mot kostnad.[källa behövs] Amerikanska skolor har en betygsskala i elva steg, där A+ är högsta betyget man kan få och F det lägsta.
292 USA har idag ett omfattande system för högre utbildning, med över 1 500 universitet och högskolor. Många av dessa anses vara de mest prestigefyllda inom sitt specialområde, till exempel Harvard University med bland annat Law, Medical och Business School, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Princeton University, Brown University, Berkeley - University of California samt Stanford University. College- och universitetsutbildningar brukar vara 4 år.
293 USA har väl utbyggda kommunikationer. Vägnätet är överlag bra med stora motorvägar sk. Interstate Highways som binder samman de stora städerna. Långdistansbussar är ett billigt och lätt resesätt. Greyhound Lines är det dominerande bussbolaget.
294 Järnvägsnätet ägs av privata bolag, och man kör mycket godstrafik på järnväg i USA. Passagerartrafiken drivs av ett statligt monopolbolag, Amtrak. Nätet är relativt väl utbyggt. Tågnätet har dock stora luckor, som exempelvis Las Vegas. Stora järnvägsbolag är bland andra Union Pacific Railroad, BNSF Railway, Norfolk Southern Railway och CSX Transportation. De två förstnämnda trafikerar i huvudsak området väster om Mississippi och de två sistnämnda området öster om nämnda flod. Dock är den regionala kollektivtrafiken sämre än den i resterande industriländer i världen, och endast de största städerna har en stabil kollektivtrafik. Många relativt stora städer (invånarantal runt 500 000) saknar helt och hållet kollektivtrafik i staden och detta har lett till att många amerikaner kör bil, vilket de får göra redan när de är 16, detta tros vara en effekt av den ofullständiga kollektivtrafiken.[källa behövs]
295 Inrikesflyget är det största i världen, uppbyggt kring så kallade nav där man vanligtvis byter flyg. USA saknar till skillnad från Europa statligt ägda flygbolag. Stora amerikanska flygbolag är American Airlines, United Airlines, Continental Airlines, Delta Air Lines, Northwest Airlines och US Airways. Det finns även lågprisbolag som JetBlue Airways och Southwest Airlines.
296 USA:s president (engelska, formellt President of the United States of America) är Förenta staternas statschef (statsöverhuvud), regeringschef och överbefälhavare för landets stridskrafter. Mandatperioden är fyra år, och det är numera bara möjligt att väljas till ämbetet två gånger. Makten i USA är delad mellan presidenten (som väljs av elektorer, utsedda av folket), kongressen (som är USA:s parlament och väljs av folket), samt USA:s högsta domstol. Nuvarande och 44:e president är demokraten Barack Obama.
297 Till följd av USA:s supermaktstatus och befattningens enorma makt, räknas Förenta staternas president som världens mäktigaste person (eller till och med "den fria världens ledare"). Den förhandenvarande ämbetsinnehavaren är alltid en av de mest kända (och stundom omstridda) offentliga personerna överhuvudtaget. Under framförallt kalla kriget, kallades den amerikanska presidenten för Leader of the Free World (den fria världens anförare).[1]
298 Rregeringschef och överbefälhavare), vilka i många andra länder upprätthålls av minst två personer. Fastän presidenten alltså förkroppsligar den amerikanska federala verkställande makten, så kontrolleras presidenten av checks and balances-systemet genom kongressen (lagstiftande) och det federala domstolsväsendet (dömande). Tack vare den strikta maktdelningen kan presidenten samtidigt inte vara vare sig ledamot i Kongressen eller federal domare.
299 Som statschef har USA:s president betydligt mer makt än Europas kvarvarande regenter, och även jämfört med de presidenter som väljs i länder där makten är koncentrerad till en premiärminister. Som Förenta staternas statschef, i fortsättningen benämnd statsöverhuvud, är presidenten innehavare av landets högsta offentliga ämbete. Presidenten kan sluta avtal i Förenta staternas namn, vilka måste ratificeras av senaten med tvåtredjedelarsmajoritet; presidenten sänder ut – med senatens bifall – Förenta staternas ambassadörer och tar officiellt emot andra staters sändebud. Presidenten utnämner – återigen med senatens bifall –domare till federala domstolar, i synnerhet till Högsta domstolen, och alla andra federala ämbeten. Befogenheten att utnämna de övriga federala ämbetena vidaredelegeras av Kongressen, med undantag för de viktigaste befattningarna. Om senaten inte är samlad, kan presidenten själv göra en utnämning (recess appointment) som annars skulle ha fordrat senatens tillstyrkan. Denna utnämning upphör dock att gälla vid utgången av senatens session.
300 Presidenten är samtidigt också Förenta staternas regeringschef. Presidenten verkställer de lagar som det amerikanska parlamentet stiftat, och kan också själv lägga fram lagförlag. Som regeringschef utser presidenten sina ministrar och de nyckelpersoner som finns samlade i Executive Office. Presidenten utnämner – med senatens bifall – och leder kabinettet. I kabinettet besitter presidenten fullständiga befogenheter att bestämma dess riktlinjer, eftersom presidenten kan entlediga en minister (secretary) när som helst. Presidenten skall då och då framlägga en berättelse över tillståndet i nationen inför Kongressen. Detta sker vanligtvis i det årliga talet State of the Union Address.
301 Ameerika Ühendriigid (lühend USA (ingliskeelsest nimest United States of America)) on riik, mille põhiosa paikneb Põhja-Ameerika mandri keskosas ning piirneb idast Atlandi ookeani ning läänest Vaikse ookeaniga. Põhjas on tal maismaapiir Kanada ja lõunas Mehhikoga. Põhja-Ameerika mandri loodeosas asub USA Alaska osariik, millel on kagus maismaapiir Kanadaga ja loodes merepiir Venemaaga. USA alasid on veel mitmel pool maailmas, sealhulgas Hawaii osariik Vaikses ookeanis.
302 USA koosneb 50 osariigist, millel vastavalt riigi föderalistlikule süsteemile on osaline autonoomia. Osariikidel on õigus luua iseseisvalt majandus- ja kultuurialaseid kontakte teiste riikidega või välisorganisatsioonidega tingimusel, et need registreeritakse vastavas föderaalasutuses. Kaitsealased ja välispoliitilised küsimused otsustab ning lepingud tehakse ainult riiklikul tasandil vastavas ministeeriumis.
303 Ameerika Ühendriigid said alguse 13 Suurbritannia asumaa Iseseisvusdeklaratsioonist, millega nad kuulutasid end vabadeks ja isesisvateks riikideks. Enamasti on see kehv või päris kõlbmatu.
304 Alates 20. sajandi keskpaigast on USA-st saanud majandusliku, poliitilise, sõjalise ja kultuurilise mõju poolest kõige võimsam riik maailmas.
305 USA-s domineerivad vanade mägede ja platoode ahelik Apalatšid, mis kulgevad põhja-lõunasuunas piki Põhja-Ameerika mandri idarannikut, ning kõrgete noorte mägede ahelikud Kaljumäestik, Kaskaadid ja Sierra Nevada, mis kulgevad põhja-lõunasuunas mandri lääneosas. Kanada kilbist Mehhiko laheni laiub suur sisemaamadalik.
306 Cairost kuni Mehhiko laheni moodustab Mississippi jõe keskmine langus üksnes umbes 12...13 cm/km, lahe lähedal alla 10 cm/km. Jõgi lookleb ning moodustab palju järvi. New Orleansist lõuna pool on hiiglaslik ja kasvav delta.
307 Ameerika Ühendriigid asuvad eemal Euroopast ja Aasiast ning seal sageli laastanud sõjad pole Ühendriike otseselt puudutanud. Naaberriigid Põhja-Ameerika mandril – Kanada ja Mehhiko – on majanduslikult ja sõjaliselt palju nõrgemad ega ole kunagi olnud Ameerika Ühendriikidele ohtlikud. Vastupidi, USA on ise laienenud naabrite arvel. Ka on naaberriigid varustanud USA-d mitme loodusvara ja odava tööjõuga, olnud tema majandusele turuks ja kapitalile tegevusväljaks, aidanud niiviisi kaasa USA õitsengule.
308 Olgugi, et USA asub muust maailmast eemal, pole ta sellest eraldatud. Üle ookeanide kulgevad head ja mõõduka pikkusega ühendusteed.
309 Kõigile merepiiridele pääseb hästi või vähemalt rahuldavalt ligi ka riigi siseosadest. Idas asuva Atlandi ookeani kaudu on peetud sidet Euroopa, Vahemeremaade ja Musta Aafrikaga. Euroopa-sidemed olid varem ülitähtsad – tuli ju sealt suurem osa Ameerika Ühendriikide rahvastikust, seal asusid peamised kaubanduspartnerid. Need sidemed on praegugi olulised, kuid jäävad üha enam muude sidemete varju.
310 Varem suheldi Euroopaga peamiselt põhjapoolsete sadamate kaudu, mis on lõunapoolsega võrreldes Euroopale märksa lähemal ja ka loodusoludelt soodsamad. Kahjuks jäävad need sadamad riigi siseosadest mõnevõrra eemale. Pärast rekonstrueerimistöid Saint Lawrence’i jõel ja mitme kanali ümberehitust pääsesid ookeanilaevad Suurele järvistule ja sealsed sadamad muutusid meresadamateks. Talvekse see meretee, aga kahjuks külmub.
311 Lõunas saavad Ameerika Ühendriigid üle Mehhiko lahe soodsalt kaupu vahetada. Kariibi mere istandusriikide ja mitme Ladina-Ameerika maaga. Pärast panama kanali valmimist 1914. aastal viib siit otsetee ka Lõuna-Ameerika lääneranniku riikidesse.
312 Järjest tähtsamaks muutuvad lääneranniku sadamad, mille kaudu peetakse ühendust paljude Vaikse ja India ookeani maadega. Küll on aga läänerannikul vähe häid looduslikke sadamaid. Rannik ise asub enamikust USA osariikidest võrdlemisi kaugel ja partneriteni teisel pool Vaikset ookeani, nagu näiteks Jaapan ja Hiina, on palju maad.
313 Riik koosneb kahest suurest osast, põhiosast ja Alaska osariigist. Enamus põhiosa piirist Kanadaga on praktiliselt sirge ning annab riigile ristkülikukujulise vormi. Ainult kirdes ja kagus on riigi maa-ala nagu „välja veninud“. Kirdes ja edelas on väljaulatuvad osad. Riigil on ka saari, näiteks Hawaii saarestik.
314 Umbes poole USA territooriumist moodustavad tasandikud ja madalad mäestikud, kõrgmäestikke on ainult lääne- ja loodeosas. Idaosas paikneb vana ja tugevasti kulunud Apalatši mäestik (kõrgeim Mount Mitchell 2037m.). Lääneosas on Kordiljeerid, mille kõrgeima osa moodustab alpiinne Alaska ahelik (USA ja kogu Põhja-Ameerika kõrgeim tipp Mount McKinley 6193 m). Alaskast lõuna pool on põhja-lõuna-suunaline mäestikuvööde, kuhu kuuluvad Ranniku-Kordiljeerid, Kaskaadid ja Sierra Nevada (Mount Whitney 4418 m) ning idas Kaljumäestik. Nende teke võib olla seotud laamtektoonikaga. (Põhja-Ameerika ja Vaikse ookeani laama mõjul).
315 Üheks peamiseks teguriks on mäestikud. Ääremäestikud takistavad niiske õhu pääsu sisemaale. Külm arktiline õhk tungib ida-lääne-suunaliste mäestike puudumise tõttu kaugele lõunasse, seepärast on USA siseosades talvel temperatuur Ligi 10° C madalam kui samadel laiustel Euroopas. Kliimat kujundavad soojad ja külmad hoovused, frondid, tsüklonid, päikesekiirgus. Mägised järsunõlvalised alad asuvad peamiselt lääneosariikides, idaosas on tasandikud ja madalad mäestikud. Kliima takistab maakasutust oluliselt vaid külmas Alaska osariigis ja mõningal määral mitmes kuivas lääneosariigis.
316 Territooriumi suurus ilma Suure järvistuta on 936 miljonit hektarit, seega umbes kõrda väiksem kui Venemaa ning veidi väiksem kui Kanada ja Hiina. Majanduslikult väärtuslikku territooriumi, mis on küllalt tasane ja asub võrdlemisi soodsas kliimas, on USA’l rohkem kui ühelgi teisel riigil maailmas – umbes 700 miljonit hektarit ehk peaaeg 3 hektarit inimese kohta.
317 Üle 1/3 pindalast, umbes 350 miljonit hektarit on riigimaa. Enamasti on see kehv või päris kõlbmatu. Suur hulk maid on parandatud või taastatud. Maakasutuse poolest on erandlik suurim osariik Alaska. Sealsest 152 miljonist hektarist on metsa all umbes 50 miljonit hektarit, ülejäänu on aga peaaegu kõik kõlbmatu maa.
318 USA's kasvab mitmesuguseid metsi. Alaska sisealadel on tüüpilised vähetootlikud okasmetsad. Neid ürgseid metsi peaaegu ei kasutata. Lääneosa kuivemas kliimas kasvavad peamiselt männimetsad. Kliimast olenevalt on need kidurad, keskmise või üle keskmise tootlikkusega metsad. Kirdeosariikide segametsad olid varem samuti üsna tootlikud. Kahjuks laastati need metsad juba 19. sajandil. Sooja parasvöötme lehtmetsi on säilinud vaid mägedes lootuskaitse-, vee- või mullakaitsemetsadena. Varasematel aegadel oli palju niiskeid lähistroopilisi metsi riigi edelaosas. Eriti väärtuslikud olid männi- ja küpressimetsad. Lähistroopilisi metsi laastati tugevasti 20. sajandi algupoolel. Seetõttu on lääneosariikide metsad praegu paremas seisukorras ja seal on valdavalt okaspuud. Lehtpuitu saab peamiselt idaosariikide laastatud metsadest.
319 Vanasti olid Ühendriikide kalavarud rikkalikud. Palju kalu oli sisevetes, eriti Suures järvistus. Juba XV sajandist tuntud heeringa- ja tursapüügi piirkonnad olid Atlandi ookeani põhjaosa rannikuvetes. Heeringat, turska, sardiine, eriti lõhelisi oli väga rikkalikult ka Vaikse ookeani rannikuvetes, kõige rohkem Alaska lõuna- ja läänerannikul. Kalarikas oli Mehhiko laht, kuhu Mississippi ja teised jõed tõid tohutul hulgal toitained. Ent kalavarade majandamine oli kaua aega väga halb: territoriaalvete laius ainult 5 kilomeetrit, kaugemates vetes levis röövpüük, millega tegelesid enamasti välismaalased. Oluliselt kahjustas kalavarasid rannikumere ja suure järvistu saastamine. Niisugustes tingimustes vähenesid kalarikkused tohutult.
320 Alles viimase paarikümne aasta jooksul on tehtud tõsiseid pingutusi kalavarude kaitseks ja taastamiseks. Vaikses ookeanis ja Mehhiko lahes on olukorra edasine halvenemine peatatud ning Suurde järvistusse kalajuurde tulnud. Atlandi ookeani veed USA rannikul on kalast aga peaaegu tühjad.
321 Ameerika Ühendriigid oma enamasti niiske kliima, suurte jõgede ja tohutute põhjaveevarudega on veega väga hästi varustatud. Sellised jõed nagu Mississippi, Yukon ja Columbia kuuluvad maailma 25 veerikkama jõe hulka. USA jõgede aastane äravool kokku on 2345 km3 (5.koht maailmas). Sellele tuleb lisada 125 000 km3 taastumatut põhjavett. Ometi on Ameerika Ühendriikides olnud viimasel aastakümnetel veega palju probleeme, peamiselt kahel põhjusel: vee tarbimine on liiga suur ja veevarad osariikide vahel ebaühtlaselt jaotunud.
322 Suure pindala ja mitmekesise geoloogilise ehituse tõttu on Ühendriikides mineraalseid varasid palju. Mitme tooraine paremad varud on aga kestva kaevandamisega ammendatud ja alles on jäänud vaid halvema kvaliteediga osa. Siiski on Ameerika Ühendriigid mineraalsetelt varadelt palju rikkamad kui Jaapan või Lääne-Euroopa riigid. Neid mineraalseid varasid, mida endal pole, saab tihti hõlpsasti hankida naaberriikidest. Rauamaagi ülisuured varud paiknevad Ülemjärve ääres, kust neid on lihtne vedada mistahes suunas. Nüüdseks on järele jäänud ainult madala kvaliteediga maak, mida üha enam asendavad Kanadast ja teistest riikidest sisseveetavad rikkad maagid. Mujal USA’s leidub rauamaaki suhteliselt vähe. Ameerika Ühendriikidel on vähe nende metallide maake, mida lisatakse terasele selle omaduste parandamiseks. Täiesti puudub nikkel, seda saadakse Kanadast. Näiteks mangaani aga peab ostma kaugematest maadest. Alumiiniumimaaki ehk boksiiti leidub USA's ainult ühes keskpärases leiukohas Arkansase osariigis. Seda maaki on otstarbekas sisse vedada Kariibi mere istandusriikidest. Vase, plii, tsingi, hõbeda jt. värviliste metallide maake leidub mitmel pool lääneosariikides üsna palju. Ka nende maakide paremad varud on ammendatud ja järele jäänud maakide metalli sisaldus on võrdlemisi väike. Rikkamaid maake veetakse sisse Mehhikost. Ameerika Ühendriikides on palju kulda, eriti Californias ja Alaskas. Nende alade asustamisel oli nii nimetatud kullapalavikul tähtis osa. Väga palju on fosforiiti, kaalisoola, väävlit.
323 Ka energiavarõde poolest kuulub USA maailma rikkaimate riikide hulka. Et energiat tarbitakse aga tohutult palju, on suur osa energiavaradest ammendatud. Ameerika Ühendriikides on mitmeid nafta- ja gaasipiirkondi sadade leiukohtadega. Vanimad neist (kirdeosas, Californias) on ammandunud või ammendumas. Üsna tühjad on ka praegusajal tähtsaimad Mehhiko lahe ja mandri kesosa basseinid Tease, Oklahoma ja Louisiana osariigist. Perspektiivsed on uued leiukohad Wyomingi osariigis. Väga palju leidub naftat ka Alaska põhjarannikul, kuid sealt on seda suure kauguse ja karmi kliima tõttu raske kätte saade. Suurem osa maailma söevarudest kuulub USA’le, Venemaale ja Hiinale. Vanimad, kuulsaimad ja kvaliteetsema söega leiukohad asuvad idas, Appalatši mäetikus. Sealsed varud on aga ammendumas. Hiigelmaardlad keskosariikides on seni peaaegu kasutamata – süsi on madala kvaliteediga ja kõlbab üksnes elektrijaamade kütteks. Uraanimaaki tuumakütuse valmistamiseks on piisavalt, kuid seda tarvitatakse perspektiivitundega ja imporditakse ka mujalt näiteks Kanadast.
324 USA paikneb Põhja Ameerika laamal, võttes enda alla 60% laamast. Paikneb ta vanaaegkonna, keskaegkonna, ja uusaegkonna kurrutuse piirkonnas ja eelkambriumi pealiskorral (settekivimite ala).
325 Riigis on aktiivseid vulkaane ja seismiliselt aktiivseid piirkondi. Kõige aktiivsemateks aladeks loetakse lääne kurdmäestikega kaetud ala. Suurimaid purustusi põhjustanud maavärinad on olnud San Francisco maavärin aastal 1906, Anchorage'i maavärin 1964. ja Los Angelesi maavärin 1994. aastal. Vulkaanidest on purustusi toonud Helensi pursked 1980. aastal. Yellowstone'i platool tegutseb ka geisreid.
326 USA põhiosa asub parasvöötmes ja lähistroopikas, Florida lõunaosa ulatub troopikavöötmesse, Alaskas valitseb lähisarktiline kliima. Ääremäestikud takistavad niiske õhu pääsu sisemaale. Külm arktiline õhk tungib ida-lääne suunaliste mäestike puudumise tõttu kaugele lõunasse, seepärast on USA siseosadest talvel t° ligi 10° madalam kui samadel laiustel Euroopas. Jaanuari keskmine t °C on Yukoni platool -30°, Ülemjärve ääres Duluthis -13,9°, Vaikse ookeani rannikul Juneau’s -1,6 °C ja Los Angeleses 12,3 °C. Juuli keskmine t° on siseosades valdavalt üle 18 °C, jahedam on rannikul; kõige kõrgem t° on mõõdetud Surmaorus (56,7 °C, läänepoolkera kõrgeim). Sademeid on kõige enam Kordiljeeride läänenõlval: 3000-4000mm, Kaskaadides kohati kuni 6000mm aastas. Rohkesti sajab ka riigi ida- ja kaugosas (1000-1200mm aastas). Tasandikel väheneb sademete hulk lääne suunas: kesktasandiku idaosas on see kuni 1000mm, Kaljumäestiku idajalamil 300mm aastas.
327 Ameerika Ühendriikide kliima on enamasti niiske, suurte jõgede ja tohutute põhjaveevarudega on veega väga hästi varustatud. Ometi on viimastel aastakümnetel olnud veega palju probleeme, sest vee tarbimine on liiga suur ja veevarud osariikide vahel ebaühtlaselt jaotunud. Veenappus on üleriigilises ulatuses ilmne. Umbes veerand USA veevarudest asub Alaskal, kus neid kuigivõrd ei vajata. Suhteliselt hea on olukord niiskes idaosas - seal teeb muret hoopis vee ajutine üleküllus, ehk üleujutused.
328 Valdav osa USA territooriumist kuulub Atlandi vesikonda, ainult läänepoolsete mäestike jõed voolavad vaiksesse ookeani. USA keskosas hõlmab Mississippi jõestik. Idapoolsed lisajõed (Ohio jt.) on veerohked ja laevatavad, läänepoolsed (Arkansas, Red River jt.) jäävad suvel palju madalamaks (vett kasutatakse niisutuseks). Apalatšidelt algavad lühikesed veerohked jõed, mis Piedmonti platoolt lasuvad kõrgete jugadena. Vaikse ookeani vesikonna jõed voolavad osalt kanjonites ja on energiarikkad (Columbia, Colorado). Suures nõos on perioodilised või lühiaegsed jõed. USA põhjapiiril asub Suur järvistu. Kordiljeerides ja Apalatšide keskosas on palju väikesi liustikujärvi, lääneosa platoodel ja nõgudes leidub jäänukjärvi (Suur Soolajärv).
329 Jõed saavad oma vee põhjaveest, sadametest ja lumesulamisveest. Alaskas on toitumisallikaks ka liustikud. Veetase kõrge, kui on palju sademeid. Esineb põudasid, mis langetavad veetaset. Jõgedel esineb üleujutusi, põhjustajaks liigsed sademed, orkaanid.
330 Jõed saavad oma vee põhjaveest, sadametest ja lumesulamisveest. Alaskas on toitumisallikaks ka liustikud. Veetase kõrge, kui on palju sademeid. Esineb põudasid, mis langetavad veetaset. Jõgedel esineb üleujutusi, põhjustajaks liigsed sademed, orkaanid.
331 Maailma viiekümne pikima jõe nimistusse mahuvad sellised USA territooriumil voolavad jõed nagu Mississippi (algab Itsasca järvest Minnesotas ja suubub Mehhiko lahte; pikkus – 3779km), Missouri (algab väikejõgede liitumisega ja suubub Mississippi’sse; pikkus – 3726), Ohio-Allegheny (pildil; algab Pennsylvania osariigis ja suubub Mississippi jõkke; pikkus – 2102km), Colorado jõgi (algab Grandi maakonnas USA-s ja suubub California lahte; pikkus – 2333km). Võrdluseks võib tuua Eesti pikima Võhandu jõe, mille algus paikneb Otepää kõrgustikul ja mis suubub Lämmijärve läbides kokku 156 kilomeetrit.
332 Maailma neljakümne suurema järve nimistusse mahuvad järgmised osaliselt või täielikult USA territooriumil asuvad järved: Ülemjärv – pindala 82 414 km2 ja suurimaks sügavuseks 406 meetrit, Huroni järv – pindala 59 596 km2 ja maksimaalseks sügavuseks 229 meetrit, Michigani järv – pindala 58 016 km2 ja maksimaalne sügavus 281 meetrit, Erie järv - pindala 25 821 km² ja suurim sügavus 64 m, Ontario järv – pindala 19 477 km2 ja suurim sügavus 237 meetrit ning Suur Soolajärv – pindala 4 662 km2 ja maksimaalne sügavus 7 meetrit.
333 Siseveetransport on tähtis eelkõige Suurel järvistul maagi ja söe veoks. Teine piirkond on Mississippi koos lisajõgede, eelkõige Ohioga. Kanalite kasutamine on viimasel ajal vähenenud. Tähtsuse on säilitanud piki Mehhiko lahe rannikut kulgev kanal, eriti naftaveoks Texase ja Mississippi vahel.
334 Torpeedo ehk esialgse nimega "iseliikuv miin" muutis allveelaevad ohtlikeks sõjalaevadeks. Torpeedo ideele tuli Austria mereväe fregatikapten Johann Blasius Luppis. 1861. a. pakkus ta oma leiutist Austria valitsusele kuid too ei olnud sellest huvitatud. 1864. a. kohtas Luppis inglasest inseneri Robert Whitheadi ning suutis teda veenda oma idee perspektiivsuses. Luppisi ja Whitheadi koostööna valmiski 1866. a. esimene torpeedo. Algul oli torpeedo aeglane ja tema tegevusraadius väike.
335 Ameerika Ühendriigid on etniliselt väga kirju maa. Riigis on 31 etnilist rühma, mille koguarv on üle 1 miljoni. Lisaks jagatakse rahvastik rassitunnuste järgi. 2000. aasta rahvaloenduse järgi on rahvastikust 77,1% valgenahalised, 12,9% afroameeriklased, 4,2% Aasia päritolu ameeriklased, 1,5% põlisameeriklased (indiaanlased ja eskimod), 0,3% Hawaii ja teiste Vaikse ookeani saarte põliselanikud ning 4% teistest rassidest.
336 Ameerika Ühendriikidel ei ole riigikeelt kuid de factõd on ametlik keel inglise keel. 27 osariigis on inglise keelel ametlik staatus. Lisaks on ametlik staatus hispaania keelel New Mexico osariigis, prantsuse keelel Louisianas ja havai keelel Hawaii osariigis.
337 Torpeedo on jõuseadme abil vee all või pinnal liikuv lõhkekeha, mis on mõeldud veesõiduki (laeva) tabamiseks.
338 17. ja 18. sajandil oli suurem osa uusasunikest Suurbritannia kolooniates religiooni suhtes ükskõiksed. Sisserändajad olid erineva taustaga, erinevalt Euroopast puudus asumaadel ka keskne religioosne institutsioon. Nii valitses noores USA-s ühtaegu suur usuline segadus kui ka liberaalne suhtumine piibli erinevatesse tõlgendustesse.
339 Pärast Vabariikliku Partei kandidaadi Abraham Lincolni võitu presidendivalimistel 1860 lõid Lõunaosariigid 4. veebruaril 1861 11 osariigi konföderatsiooni, mille presidendiks sai Jefferson Davis. Konföderaalide rünnakuga Fort Sumterile 14. aprillil 1861 algas Ameerika kodusõda. Hoolimata põhjaosariikide majandusliku potentsiaali ja inimressursside ülekaalust, saavutas Konföderatsioon esialgu tunduvat edu. Murrangu tõid Homesteadi akt 1862, neegerorjade vabaks kuulutamine 1. jaanuaril 1863 ja armeesse mobiliseerimine, mis andsid sõjale liberaalse revolutsiooni ilme. 9. aprillil 1865 lõppes sõda Konföderatsiooni purustamisega.
340 Ameerika Ühendriikide kodusõda ehk setsessioonisõda (ingliskeelses ajalookirjutuses tuntud kui American Civil War ja War Between the States) oli aastatel 1861–1865 Ameerika Ühendriikide territooriumil aset leidnud sõda Uniooni ehk Põhja ja Konföderatsiooni ehk Lõuna vahel. Sõja peamisteks põhjusteks on nimetatud orjanduse probleemi, Lõuna majanduslikku mahajäämust ja hirmu oma eriseisundit kaotada ning mõtteviisi ja ühiskonna kardinaalset erinevust.
341 1860. aasta USA presidendivalimistel oli võitnud Vabariiklaste Partei kandidaat Abraham Lincoln, keda lõunaosariikides peeti radikaalseks orjuse vastaseks. Seega kardeti, et Lincoln keelab orjanduse ja muudab Lõuna Põhjast majanduslikult täielikult sõltuvaks. Selle vältimiseks otsustati Unioonist lahku lüüa ja moodustada omaette riik.
342 Esimesena lahkus 20. detsembril 1860 USA koosseisust Lõuna-Carolina, millel oli sageli keskvõimuga lahkarvamusi olnud, hiljem järgnesid mitmed teised. Veebruariks 1861 oli setsesseerunud riike juba seitse: Lõuna-Carolina, Georgia, Alabama, Florida, Texas, Mississippi ja Louisiana. Nad moodustasid uue Ameerika Riikide Konföderatsiooni (The Confederate States of America) ning valisid enda presidendiks Jefferson Davise. Otsustavaks tuleks aga ilmselt pidada Lõuna rikkaima ja mõjukaima osariigi Virginia lahkulöömist Unioonist 1861. aasta märtsis. Lisaks temale ühinesid Konföderatsiooniga veel ka Tennessee, Arkansas ja Põhja-Carolina.
343 Sõda algas 12. aprillil 1861, kui lõunaosariikide väed ründasid Charlestonis asunud Fort Sumteri kindlust. See tegi edasised kompromissid võimatuks. Põhi otsustas Lõuna kiiresti alistada ning saatis seetõttu tolle pealinna Richmondi peale oma põhijõud, lootes vastupanu ühe otsustava lahinguga lüüa. Kuid esimeses Bull Runi lahingus (21. juulil 1861) suutsid lõunaosariigid Põhja väed sisuliselt purustada, sealjuures mängis Lõuna võidu juures otsustavat osa väejuht Thomas J. Jackson, kes osava kaitsetegevuse eest selles lahingus sai hüüdnime "Kivimüür".
344 Järgneval aastal tungisid põhjaosariikide väed Lõuna territooriumile lääne poolt, otsustades pikaajalisema kurnamisstrateegia kasuks. Merel kehtestati blokaad, Uniooni väed kindral Ulysses Simpson Granti juhtimisel liikusid aga läbi Tennessee lõuna poole. Neid püüdsid takistada Konföderatsiooni väed Shiloh lahingus, kuid edutult. Sealt sai alguse kindral Granti tähelend, mis viis ta lõpuks presidenditoolile.
345 Suvel 1862 püüdsid Uniooni väed kindral George B. McClellani juhtimisel alistada ka Richmondi, kuid Seitsme Päeva lahingutes (25. juuni–1. juuli) suutis kindral Robert E. Lee Põhja väed tagasi paisata. Hiljem, 28.–30. augustil peetud teises Bull Runi lahingus võitsid Konföderatsiooni väed Uniooni veelkord. Ent Antietam Creeki lahingus (17. september 1862) sai Lee esimese tõsisema kaotuse osaliseks, seda peamiselt tänu lahinguplaanide sattumisele vaenlase kätte.
346 1863. aasta algas Konföderatsioonile suhteliselt edukalt, kui Lee võitis 27. aprillist 6. maini peetud Chancellorsville'i lahingu. Siiski polnud võit kuigi magus, sest seal langes Lee lähim abiline, Kivimüür Jackson, seda omade kuulidest tabatuna.
347 Kindral Lee liikus peale Chancellorsville'i edasi põhja suunas, et pealinn Washington sisse piirata ning sundida Uniooni sõda lõpetama ja Lõuna eraldumisega nõustuma. Kuid Gettysburgi linna juures põrkas ta kokku põhjaosariikide vägedega, kes linnalähedastel küngastel olid head kaitsepositsioonid välja valinud. Lee püüdis küll nendest läbi murda, kuid kurnatud lõunaosariikide väed, kes olid varem kaotanud ka ühe oma parimatest väejuhtidest, ei suutnud 1.–3. juulini kestnud Gettysburgi lahingus Põhja vägesid taganema sundida ning kaotasid rohkem mehi kui viimased. Nii pidi Lee sealt taganema ja initsiatiiv sõjas kaldus seejärel Põhja poolele. Gettysburgi lahinguga samal ajal oli kindral Grant võitnud Vicksburgi kampaania Mississippil, mis tähendas Lõuna sisulist poolitamist. Chattanooga lahingu jäel 1863. aasta novembris liikusid kindral William T. Shermani väed Georgiasse ning laastasid seda metsikult. 1864. aastal jõudis Sherman ookeanini ja nii oli Konföderatsioon kaheks lõigatud.
348 1864. aasta ei toonud Põhjale veel siiski võitu, sest Lõuna kindralid Lee ja James Longstreet suutsid Granti peatada Wildernessi lahingus. Kuid Põhja ülekaal pani end üha enam maksma ning Leed suruti armutult Virginiasse.
349 9. aprillil 1865 piirasid Granti väed Lee Appomatoxi kohtuhoones sisse ning ehkki kindralil oleks olnud veel võimalus põgeneda ja alustada selle lähedal asuvates metsades partisanivõitlust, otsustas ta kapituleeruda, et mõttetult pikaks ja ohvriterohkeks kujunenud sõda lõpetada. Koos Leega alistusid ka Lõuna põhiväed, nii et Appomatoxi kapitulatsiooni võib sisuliselt lugeda ka sõja lõpuks. Ametlikult leidis see aset mõni päev hiljem.
350 Ameerika kodusõda on verisemaid võitlusi, mida tunneb ajalugu. Põhjariigid kaotasid langenutena ja haavadesse surnutena umbes 360 000 meest, lõunariigid – 258 000. Ameeriklaste omavaheline sõda maksis hiigelsuuri summasid. Võitjad põhjariigid kulutasid üksi 3,25 miljardit dollarit.
351 Os Estados Unidos da América (em inglês United States of America) são uma república federal presidencialista, composta por cinqüenta estados e um Distrito Federal. O nome do país é frequentemente referido pelas siglas USA ou US (em inglês) e EUA (em português).
352 A maior parte dos Estados Unidos localiza-se na região central da América do Norte, possuindo fronteiras terrestres com o Canadá e com o México, sendo que o restante do país limita-se com o Oceano Pacífico, o Mar de Bering, o Oceano Ártico, o Golfo do México e o Oceano Atlântico. Dos 50 estados, apenas o Alasca e o Havaí não são contíguos com os outros 48 Estados, nem entre si. Os Estados Unidos também possuem diversos territórios, distritos e outras possessões em torno do mundo, primariamente no Caribe e no Oceano Pacífico. Cada Estado possui um alto nível de autonomia local, de acordo com o sistema federal.
353 Os Estados Unidos celebram o seu dia da independência a 4 de julho de 1776, quando as Treze Colônias britânicas na América do Norte fizeram a Declaração de Independência, rejeitando a autoridade britânica, a favor da política de autodeterminação. Esta independência foi oficialmente reconhecida pelo Reino Unido no Tratado de Paris. Os Estados Unidos adotaram sua atual Constituição em 1789, que estabeceu a estrutura básica do governo americano. Desde então, a nação gradualmente desenvolveu-se, tornando-se uma superpotência após o fim da Segunda Guerra Mundial, passando a exercer grande influência econômica, política, científica, tecnológica, militar e cultural no mundo.
354 A ocupação do território onde hoje estão os Estados Unidos, começa com a migração de humanos da Ásia, através do Estreito de Bering, num período indeterminado (estimativas variam de dez a quarenta mil anos atrás).
355 Diversas tribos nativos americanas viviam na região que atualmente constitui os Estados Unidos muito tempo antes da chegada dos primeiros europeus. Cada um destes grupos indígenas era composto por diversas tribos com culturas e idiomas semelhantes, que eram aliados ou neutros entre si. Entre os grupos indígenas dos Estados Unidos, destacam-se os iroqueses, os algonquinos, os hurões, os sioux, os apaches, os uto-astecas, os havaianos e os esquimós. Estas famílias indígenas estavam, por sua vez, divididas em várias tribos menores. Não se sabe ao certo o número total de nativos indígenas que viviam no atual Estados Unidos nos anos que precederam à chegada dos primeiros europeus. Estima-se este número entre um a quinze milhões de índios. Estes números também incluem astecas que viviam no sul do atual Estados Unidos.
356 Os primeiros europeus chegaram ao longo do século XVI. Diferentes nações exploraram e reivindicaram diferentes partes dos Estados Unidos. Os espanhóis foram os primeiros a explorarem as atuais regiões de Flórida, Texas, Novo México, Arizona e Califórnia. Tais regiões continuariam sobre controle hispânico até meados do século XIX. Os espanhóis fundaram o primeiro assentamento permanente em atual território americano, St. Augustine, em 28 de agosto de 1565. Os franceses instalaram-se ao longo da região central do atual Estados Unidos, e neerlandeses e suecos no nordeste. Durante a década de 1640 os neerlandeses expulsaram os suecos da região.
357 A Virgínia foi a primeira colônia britânica nas Américas. A colônia britânica de Virgínia foi fundada em 1606. Jamestown foi o primeiro assentamento britânico fundado no continente americano. Os colonos britânicos esperavam encontrar ouro ou outros metais preciosos, mas nada encontraram. Ao invés disso, a Virgínia eventualmente tornou-se uma colônia agrária, passando a exportar tabaco para o Reino Unido a partir de 1612. A Virgínia também destaca-se por ter sido a primeira colônia a criar um sistema de governo, a Casa de Burgess, uma câmara legislativa.
358 Outras províncias coloniais ao britânicas logo foram fundadas pelo Reino Unido, ao longo do Oceano Atlântico. Massachusetts foi fundada em 1620, e Nova Hampshire, em 1623. A colônia de Nova Iorque foi fundada em 1624. Esta última colônia duplicaria após os britânicos terem expulsado os neerlandeses do nordeste do atual Estados Unidos. Os neerlandeses estavam instalados no que atualmente constitui o sul do Estado de Nova Iorque, em uma colônia chamada Novos Países Baixos, cuja capital era Nova Amsterdam. Os Novos Países Baixos foram capturados em 1664 pelos britânicos, e Nova Amsterdão foi renomeada como Nova Iorque.
359 O primeiro assentamento permanente em Connecticut foi fundado em 1633, Maryland em 1632, Rhode Island em 1636, Delaware em 1638, Pensilvânia em 1643, Carolina do Norte em 1653, Nova Jérsei em 1660, e a Carolina do Sul, em 1670. Maryland destaca-se por ter sido a primeira colônia a permitir a livre prática de qualquer religião.
360 O Massachusetts destacou-se em seu pioneirismo na educação, tendo fundado a Faculdade de Harvard - atual Universidade de Harvard - em 1636 - a primeira instituição de educação superior nos atuais Estados Unidos - e o primeiro sistema de educação pública, em 1647. Entre a década de 1650 e a 1660, os britânicos gradualmente conquistaram os Novos Países Baixos, tendo anexado estas colônias neerlandesas definitivamente em 1664. Nova Amsterdão, capital e maior cidade destas colônias, foi renomeada como Nova Iorque. Em 1672, a primeira estrada de maior importância foi fundada nos Estados Unidos, conectando Boston com Nova Iorque. O primeiro jornal foi fundado em 1704, em Boston, sob o nome de Boston News-Letter.
361 Em 1663, o Rei Carlos I de Inglaterra cedeu a região localizada entre a colônia britânica de Virgínia e a então colônia espanhola de Flórida para oito diferentes proprietários. Esta região era então chamada de Carolina. Em 1712, a Carolina foi dividida em três regiões. A região setentrional tornou-se a Carolina do Norte, e a região central tornou-se a Carolina do Sul. A região sul continuou escassamente habitado, e somente tornou-se oficialmente colônia britânica em 1733, sob o nome de Geórgia.
362 Em 1753, a população dos Estados Unidos era de um 1,3 milhão de habitantes. A economia do país então era baseada primariamente na agricultura e na exportação de produtos agropecuários a outros países. Então, as Treze Colônias já atraíam milhares de imigrantes anualmente, tornando-se uma sociedade multicultural.
363 Os atuais Estados Unidos da América nasceram da união de Treze Colônias britânicas estabelecidas na costa atlântica da América do Norte a partir do século XVII. Em 1776, uma revolta foi organizada pela classe dirigente dos colonos e seguiu-se a Revolução Americana de 1776, que foi uma guerra de independência contra a autoridade do rei do Reino Unido. Em 1789, o país adotou uma constituição e assumiu a forma de uma República Federal, concedendo grande autonomia aos Estados federados. Desde o reconhecimento da sua independência pelo Reino Unido em 1783, e até meados do século XX, novos territórios e Estados foram sendo incorporados, ampliando as fronteiras do país até ao Oceano Pacífico.
364 Durante o século XVI e século XVII, exploradores espanhóis exploraram e colonizaram esparsamente as regiões que constituem hoje o sul da Flórida e da região sul dos Estados Unidos. O primeiro assentamento inglês bem-sucedido foi Jamestown, localizado no atual Estado de Virgínia, fundado em 1607. Durante as duas décadas seguintes, vários assentamentos neerlandeses foram fundados no que atualmente constitui o Estado de Nova Iorque, incluindo a vila de Nova Amsterdam, que é atualmente Cidade de Nova Iorque, bem como a extensiva colonização inglesa da costa leste dos Estados Unidos, tendo expulso os neerlandeses da região por volta da década de 1670.
365 Após a Guerra Franco-Indígena, onde a França perdeu suas colônias que atualmente constituem o leste do Canadá para o Reino Unido, este começou a impor impostos nas Treze Colônias — sendo os custos financeiros uma das principais razões da guerra. Estes impostos tornaram-se extremamente impopulares entre os colonos americanos, que além disso, não dispunham de representação no Parlamento do Reino Unido. As tensões entre as Treze Colônias britânicas e entre o Reino Unido cresceram, e as Treze Colônias rebelaram-se contra o Parlamento e Rei britânicos, na Guerra de Independência, iniciada em 1775, e que perdurou até 1783. A estrutura política original das Treze Colônias era uma confederação, ratificada em 1781. Em 1789, os Estados Unidos optaram em se tornar uma República Federal.
366 Desde tempos coloniais, os Estados Unidos enfrentaram a falta de mão-de-obra. À época, as diferenças socio-econômicas no país eram enormes, com um norte industrializado e um sul agrário. A falta de mão-de-obra incentivou a imigração européia no Norte e o uso do trabalho escravo no Sul — que fazia uso extensivo de escravos comprados no continente africano. Os Estados industrializados do norte eram contra a escravidão, enquanto o Sul achava que a escravidão era indispensável para o contínuo sucesso da agricultura sulista. Estas diferenças foram um dos muitos motivos de tensão política que gradualmente desencadearam a formação dos Estados Confederados da América, o que gerou a Guerra Civil Americana, da união, contra os sulistas — confederados — entre 1861 e 1865, uma guerra civil na qual o número de baixas americanas foi maior do que a soma de todas as baixas americanas sofridas em todas as outras guerras na qual os Estados Unidos se envolveram, desde sua independência, até a atual Guerra contra o Iraque.
367 Ao longo do século XIX, vários novos Estados foram adicionados aos 13 originais (por exemplo o Texas, anexado ao México), à medida que a nação se expandiu na América do Norte. O Destino Manifesto foi uma filosofia política dos Estados Unidos que encorajou a expansão rumo ao Oeste no país. À medida que a população dos estados do Leste crescia, e um número cada vez maior de imigrantes entrava no país, cada vez mais assentadores passaram a habitar regiões cada vez mais a Oeste do país. Enquanto isto acontecia, os Estados Unidos acabaram efetivamente com todas as nações nativo americanas existentes em território americano, e movendo forçadamente a população indígena dos seus antigos territórios para reservas indígenas. Esta migração forçada é ainda um assunto muito discutido nos Estados Unidos, com várias tribos nativos americanas ainda reivindicando terras, e defendendo uma política separatista.
368 Em algumas áreas, os nativos americanos foram exterminados pelos colonos, que os expulsaram de suas terras. Ao contrário da maioria dos países europeus, os Estados Unidos nunca foram uma potência colonial, embora, através de várias vitórias militares, diplomacia e acordos externos, os Estados Unidos tivessem adquirido um número de possessões ultra-marítimas, desde Cuba até as Filipinas. Embora gradualmente, muitos destes territórios adquiriram soberania, e outras destas possessões continuaram sob controle dos Estados Unidos, geralmente, na forma de territórios (como Porto Rico). O Havaí é o único destas possessões que se tornou um Estado, em 1959.
369 Os Estados Unidos adotavam, até a Guerra Civil Americana, uma política isolacionista, não procurando intrometer-se em conflitos internacionais. Porém, isto mudou com o fim da guerra civil. Durante o século XIX, os Estados Unidos tornaram-se uma potência econômica e militar mundial. O crescimento da influência dos Estados Unidos sobre o mundo continuou no século XX, um século que é por vezes chamado de O século americano, por causa da tremenda influência americana sobre o resto do mundo, onde o país se tornou o maior pólo de desenvolvimento tecnológico do planeta.
370 A influência americana sobre o mundo pôde ser vista na Grande Depressão, um período de grande recessão da economia entre 1929 e 1940, que não somente abateu todo o país como o Canadá e os países europeus (especialmente o Reino Unido e a Alemanha). Porém, isto mudou com a entrada do país na Primeira Guerra Mundial e na Segunda Guerra Mundial. Após o fim desta, os Estados Unidos emergiram definitivamente como uma das superpotências mundiais, juntamente com a União Soviética - desencadeando a Guerra Fria.
371 Entre 1945 e 1991, ano do fim da União Soviética e do fim da Guerra Fria, os Estados Unidos passaram a estar muito envolvidos em assuntos externos - especialmente guerra ideológica contra o comunismo - participando ativamente na Guerra da Coréia e na Guerra do Vietnã, além de apoiar regimes militares em diversos países sul-americanos e a guerrilha anticomunista na Nicarágua. Com o colapso da União Soviética, os Estados Unidos emergiram como a única superpotência mundial. Passaram então a envolver-se em ações de paz, participando na Guerra do Golfo, em 1991, removendo tropas iraquianas que haviam invadido o Kuwait.
372 Em 2001, os Estados Unidos sofreram o pior ataque ao seu território ao longo da história do país, com os Ataques de 11 de Setembro, onde quase três mil pessoas morreram. Este ataque terrorista, desencadeou a denominada Guerra contra o terrorismo, e, posteriomente, a controversa Invasão do Iraque, além da caça ao mandante dos atentados, Osama bin Laden.
373 Sendo o terceiro maior país do mundo em extensão territorial, a paisagem dos Estados Unidos varia de região a região. O país possui grandes florestas temperadas na costa leste, e no noroeste, pantanais na Flórida, grandes planícies e o sistema fluvial do Mississippi-Missouri na região central, as Montanhas Rochosas a oeste das planícies, desertos e zonas costeiras a oeste das Montanhas Rochosas, e florestas húmidas temperadas no noroeste da costa do Pacífico. As regiões árticas ao norte do Alasca e as ilhas vulcânicas do Havaí aumentam ainda a diversidade geográfica e climática do país.
374 O mapa político dos Estados Unidos está dividido em três distintas secções: O Alasca, conectado em terra apenas com o Canadá, à leste; o Havaí, um arquipélago localizado no meio do Oceano Pacífico, e os Estados Unidos Continentais, que compreendem os 48 Estados localizados na América do Norte. A fronteira dos Estados Unidos Continentais com o Canadá é a mais longa fronteira não defendida do mundo. Os Estados Unidos possuem três fronteiras terrestres, duas com o Canadá (norte dos 48 Estados continentais e a leste do Alasca) e uma com o México. Também faz fronteira com a Rússia, a oeste do Alasca, através do Estreito de Bering.
375 Devido à grande extensão territorial dos Estados Unidos, o clima do país varia muito, de região à região. A Flórida possui um clima subtropical, enquanto o Alasca possui um clima polar. Vastas porções do país têm um clima continental, com verões quentes e invernos frios. Algumas partes dos Estados Unidos, em particular partes da Califórnia, têm um clima mediterrâneo. No geral, porém, a maior parte dos Estados Unidos possui um clima temperado ou sub-tropical, marcado por quatro distintas estações, com mudanças regulares de temperatura e precipitação.
376 Os Estados Unidos são uma República Federal Presidencialista. No nível federal, o principal oficial do Poder Executivo do país é o Presidente, eleito por um colégio eleitoral. O candidato à presidência que obtém a maioria dos votos do colégio eleitoral em uma dada eleição presidencial é o vencedor desta eleição.
377 O Poder Legislativã americano é exercido pelo Congresso, composto pela Câmara dos Representantes e pelo Senado. Cada Estado tem direito a dois senadores e a um número de representantes proporcionais à sua população. O Poder Judiciário pertence aos tribunais federais, dos quais a maior é a Suprema Corte. Cada Estado possui direito a um certo número de votos no colégio eleitoral (que é proporcional à sua população).
378 Os Estados Unidos estão divididos em 50 Estados e um distrito federal, o Distrito de Columbia. Cada Estado, por sua vez, está subdividido em condados, com excepção da Luisiana, em que as subdivisões se chamam "paróquias", (parishes, em inglês) e do Alasca, onde as subdivisões estaduais são chamadas de "distritos" (boroughs). Os Estados Unidos da América são uma República Federal, que dão aos Estados federados muitos poderes, que na maioria dos outros países do mundo são exclusivas do governo nacional.
379 São os governos estaduais que possuem a maior influência sobre o dia-a-dia da população americana. Cada Estado possui sua própria Constituição e possui o poder de aprovar suas próprias regras e leis, referentes a certos assuntos como propriedade, crime, saúde e educação. O principal oficial de um Estado é o Governador. Cada Estado também possui uma legislatura bicameral. Os membros do Legislativo são eleitos pela população do Estado, exceto no Estado de Nebraska, onde cada condado possui direito a um certo número de membros na legislatura. Destaca-se a legislatura da Nova Hampshire, que é o terceiro maior Poder Legislativo do mundo anglófono, e possui um representante para cada três mil habitantes. Cada Estado possui seu próprio Executivo, Legislativo e Judiciário.
380 A área, população e/ou produto interno bruto de vários dos Estados dos Estados Unidos podem ser comparados com a de vários países do mundo. A população da Califórnia, por exemplo, é maior do que a do Canadá. Caso o Estado fosse um país independente, sua população seria a trigésima-quinta maior do mundo, e seu PIB, o oitavo maior do mundo. Já o Alasca seria a décima sétima maior entidade nacional do mundo, em área, caso fosse um país independente, com área comparável ao do Irã.
381 As instituições que são responsáveis pelo governo regional são tipicamente Conselhos Municipais - que tomam efeito em cidades (cities ou towns), vilas (village), municipalidades regionais (towns, regional municipality, municipality, hamlet) e condados (counties). Municipalidades regionais e condados são um agrupamento de cidades e vilas. Tais subdivisões regionais, bem como as cidades, aprovam leis que têm efeito nestas subdivisões em particular, lidando com assuntos como trânsito e a venda de álcool, bem como o poder de criarem impostos. Nas cidades, o maior oficial eleito pela população é o prefeito. Em alguns Estados, os condados ou municipalidades regionais também possuem o direito de criar leis e impostos que valem para todas as cidades e vilas dentro dos limites do condado. Em outros Estados, os condados ou municipalidades regionais possuem pouco ou nenhum poder, servindo apenas como distinções geográficas.
382 Os Estados Unidos possuem vários territórios e possessões insulares ultramarinas. A maior delas é a ilha de Porto Rico. Outras territórios ultra-marítimos de importância incluem a Samoa Americana, Guam, Marianas Setentrionais e as Ilhas Virgens Americanas. A Marinha americana têm ocupado uma base militar na Baía de Guantánamo, desde 1898.
383 Os Estados Unidos possuem uma das populações mais multiculturais do mundo, em termos de ascendência étnica e racial. A região que constitui atualmente os Estados Unidos eram inicialmente habitados por povos nativos americanos, como esquimós no Alasca e algonquinos, hurões e iroqueses no nordeste do atual Estados Unidos.
384 No século XVII e XVIII, o território que atualmente constitui os Estados Unidos foi colonizado por europeus. Imigrantes ingleses, muitos dos quais fugiam de perseguição religiosa na Europa, constituíam a maioria dos colonos. Todavia, colonos escoceses, franceses e neerlandeses também instalaram-se em diversas regiões do atual Estados Unidos. Escravos foram trazidos do continente africano do século XVII ao início do século XIX para serem usados como mão-de-obra e, atualmente, seus descendentes, conhecidos como afro-americanos, constituem uma considerável parcela da população americana, formando 12,9% da população dos Estados Unidos.
385 A partir de 1850, pessoas de diversas partes do mundo passaram a imigrar para os Estados Unidos. Até o final do século XIX, a maioria dos imigrantes vinham dos países da Europa Ocidental e Setentrional (Alemanha, Irlanda, Inglaterra e Escandinávia). Italianos, poloneses e judeus imigraram em grande quantidade entre o final do século XIX e meados do século XX (até a década de 1970). Os maiores grupos étnicos europeus são alemães (que compõem 15,2% da população americana), irlandeses (10,8%), ingleses (8,7%), italianos (5,6%), escandinavos (3,4%), poloneses (3,2%) e franceses (3%). Brancos constituem no total 77% da população dos Estados Unidos - 69%, excluindo os hispânicos.
386 Em décadas recentes até os dias atuais, hispânicos e asiáticos são os principais grupos de imigrantes instalando-se no país. Hispânicos constituem uma considerável parcela da população americana, sendo atualmente a maior minoria étnico-racial dentro dos Estados Unidos, compondo cerca de 13,4% da população americana. Dado a alta imigração de hispânicos para os Estados Unidos, espera-se um crescimento drástico desta percentagem nas próximas décadas. Cerca de 64% dos hispânicos são mexicanos.[5] Boa parte desta imigração é ilegal, porém.
387 Asiáticos constituem um expressivo grupo racial minoritário dos Estados Unidos, constituindo 4,2% da população do país. Expressiva a partir da década de 1860, a imigração de asiáticos aumentou drasticamente durante a década de 1960, mantendo-se em alta até os dias atuais.
388 Os Estados Unidos nunca tiveram um idioma oficial, embora o inglês tenha sido sempre o idioma predominante no país, e seja falado pela imensa maioria da população, sendo de facto o idioma oficial dos Estados Unidos. Por isso, o inglês é o idioma usado em quaisquer pronunciamentos oficiais, que vão desde tratados até leis e sentenças. 27 Estados adotaram o inglês como idioma oficial. Destes Estados, três adotam um segundo idioma oficial: o Havaí, que adotou o havaiano como segundo idioma oficial; a Luisiana, que adotou o francês; e o Novo México, que adotou o espanhol. Nos Estados americanos sem idioma oficial, o inglês é adotado em todos serviços públicos, serviços em outros idiomas são fornecidos em áreas com grande população de imigrantes. Já Estados onde o inglês (e por vezes um segundo idioma) é o idioma oficial não precisam necessariamente fornecer serviços públicos em outros idiomas.
389 Muitos dos imigrantes que vão aos Estados Unidos possuem pouco ou nenhum conhecimento de inglês. A maioria deles aprende inglês o suficiente no país para comunicar-se com outros americanos. Os filhos destes imigrantes, que estudam em escolas americanas, aprendem primariamente inglês nas escolas. Assim, a cada geração, o idioma materno acaba cedendo, gradualmente, lugar ao inglês. Os descendentes diretos destes imigrantes geralmente falam tanto o idioma materno quanto inglês, enquanto muitas vezes os netos dos imigrantes falam apenas inglês.
390 Atualmente, o espanhol é o segundo idioma mais falado dos Estados Unidos. Cerca de 10,8% da população americana possui o espanhol como idioma materno. A maioria dos falantes do espanhol mora nos estados do oeste e do sul (especialmente nos estados da Califórnia, Novo México e Texas). Desde a década de 1950, muitos hispânicos imigraram para os Estados Unidos, vindos do México, Cuba e outros países hispânicos. Muitos desses novos imigrantes aprenderam ou aprendem o inglês, mas outros falam apenas espanhol. Por isso, em cidades ou bairros onde a concentração de hispânicos é alta, pronunciamentos oficiais são dados tanto em inglês quanto em espanhol.
391 Como não existe um idioma oficial no país, o domínio do inglês não é de todo indispensável nos Estados Unidos, especialmente nos estados americanos que possuem uma grande população de imigrantes recentes - especialmente hispânicos. Muitas pessoas, porém, acreditam que todo cidadão estadunidense deveria saber inglês. Estas pessoas acreditam que é quase impossível para as pessoas sem o domínio do inglês conseguirem emprego fora de bairros com grande presença de imigrantes recentes. Além disso, tais ativistas alegam que um único idioma falado por todos no país é um fator importante para a união como um todo dos Estados Unidos. Por isto, na década de 1980 e na década de 1990, vários Estados criaram leis fazendo do inglês como único idioma legal dentro de tais Estados.
392 Os Estados Unidos são um país altamente urbanizado. Cerca de 80% da população americana vive em cidades. Estas cobrem apenas 2,75% da área total do país. Existem duas grandes megalópoles no país. Uma está localizada na região nordeste dos Estados Unidos, composta principalmente pelo Estado da Nova Jérsei e pelas cidades de Nova Iorque, Boston, Filadélfia e Washington, DC, na costa atlântica. A outra está localizado na região sudoeste do país, na costa pacífica, centralizadas nas cidades de Los Angeles, San Francisco e Sacramento.
393 Grandes subúrbios cercam muitas das cidades dos Estados Unidos, sendo desde o fim da Segunda Guerra Mundial a principal forma de moradia das famílias de classe média e alta do país. As cidades centrais e cidades vizinhas formam áreas metropolitanas. Existem cerca de 260 áreas metropolitanas no país, das quais as maiores são as regiões metropolitanas de Nova Iorque que possui 21 milhões de habitantes, Los Angeles, que possui 13 milhões de habitantes, e Chicago, que possui 9 milhões de habitantes. A população dos subúrbios das cidades centrais destas metrópoles é considerável, e muitas vezes superior à população da cidade central. Washington, DC, por exemplo, possui somente cerca de 535 mil habitantes, enquanto sua região metropolitana possui cerca de 4 milhões de habitantes. Desde 1970, mais americanos vivem nos subúrbios do que nas cidades centrais.
394 A economia dos Estados Unidos da América está organizada segundo o modelo capitalista e é marcada por um crescimento constante de longo prazo, baixa carga tributária, mesmo para os padrões dos países desenvolvidos, baixas taxas de desemprego e de inflação, embora tenha apresentado nos últimos anos um grande déficit, tanto de balança comercial quanto de orçamento de seu governo. A economia dos Estados Unidos pode ser vista como a mais importante e influente do mundo em tempos atuais. Vários países indexaram as suas moedas ao dólar, ou chegam mesmo a usar a moeda americana como sua moeda oficial, e os mercados de capitais americanos são em geral vistos como indicadores da economia mundial.
395 O país tem enormes recursos minerais, com grandes depósitos de ouro, petróleo, carvão e urânio. Na agricultura, está entre os maiores produtores mundiais de milho, trigo, açúcar e tabaco, entre outras produções. A indústria de manufatura americana é diversificada, com automóveis, aviões e produtos eletrônicos sendo os principais produtos industrializados produzidos no país. O maior setor econômico, no entanto, é o de serviços: cerca de três quartos dos habitantes dos Estados Unidos trabalham nesse setor.
396 A educação nos Estados Unidos da América é fornecida primariamente pelo governo. Porém, o sistema educacional estadunidense é altamente descentralizado. Regras e padrões educacionais são ditados pelo Departamento de Educação de cada Estado, com o Departamento de Educação dos Estados Unidos da América monitorando o estado da educação no país, e fornece verbas aos Departamentos de Educação dos Estados. Escolas em geral são administradas por distritos escolares, cuja juridisção em geral é co-existente com os limites de uma cidade ou um condado. Distritos escolares possuem o poder de cobrar impostos dos habitantes vivendo em sua jurisdição, com outras verbas necessárias sendo fornecidas pelo Estado. Universidades e faculdades públicas são quase sempre administradas pelo Estado. A taxa de alfabetismo dos Estados Unidos é de 97%.
397 Os Estados Unidos possuem uma extensiva malha rodoviária, ferroviária e hidroviária. De fato, a quilometragem destas malhas são as maiores do mundo em suas respectivas categorias. Existem cerca de 75 mil quilômetros de rodovias e vias expressas de alta capacidade. Para cada 100 habitantes, existem cerca de 75 veículos motorizados (carros, caminhões e ônibus) e 56,1 automóveis. Caminhões transportam cerca de um quarto de toda a carga transportada no país.
398 Trens transportam cerca de 35% de toda a carga transportada no país, enquanto respondem por apenas 1% dos passageiros movimentados. O contrário acontece com as linhas aéreas americanas, que transportam 18% dos passageiros mas menos de 1% da carga no país. O mercado estadunidense de passageiros no setor aéreo é a maior do mundo. Nova Iorque, Chicago, Atlanta, Los Angeles, Dallas, Washington, DC e San Francisco destacam-se como grandes centros aeroportuários.
399 Cerca de 15% de toda a carga transportada no pãís é transportada via hidrovias como rios e lagos, além de mares e oceanos. Los Angeles-Long Beach, Nova Iorque-Nova Jérsei, Filadélfia, San Francisco, New Orleans, Miami e Houston destacam-se como grandes centros portuários. O porto mais movimentado dos Estados Unidos por número de navios atendidos é o de New Orleans, enquanto o porto mais movimentado do país, em tonelagem de carga movimentada, é o de Los Angeles-Long Beach.
400 O controlador primário das telecomunicações dos Estados Unidos é a Federal Communications Commission, que regula todos os serviços relacionados com telecomunicações. A indústria da internet nos Estados Unidos porém é muito menos regulada do que outras indústrias relacionadas com o setor de telecomunicação, por causa de agressivos programas de lobby. São publicados diaramente no Estados Unidos cerca de 60 milhões de jornais. No país, são publicados milhares de jornais diários ou semanais. Existem também no país milhares de estações de rádio e televisão. Praticamente toda residência americana possui uma rádio, e aproximadamente 93% das pessoas com cinco anos ou mais de idade possuem ao menos uma televisão ou mais.
401 Estados Unidos de América (en inglés United States of America) es un país situado casi en su totalidad en América del Norte, comprendiendo también un estado en Oceanía. Está conformado por 50 estados y un distrito federal. También tiene varios territorios dependientes ubicados en las Antillas y en Oceanía. Su forma de gobierno es la de una república presidencialista y federal. Con unos 305.000.000 habitantes[2] es el tercer país más poblado del mundo, aunque se halla bastante lejos de los dos primeros, China y la India.
402 En América del Norte están localizados 49 estados, de los cuales, 48 estados continentales contiguos están en la región entre Canadá y México. Alaska está en la zona noroeste de América del Norte, separada de los otros estados por el territorio canadiense de Columbia Británica. El archipiélago polinesio de Hawái se ubica en el Océano Pacífico. La capital federal, Washington, se sitúa en el Distrito de Columbia, entre los estados de Maryland al norte y Virginia al sur.
403 El nombre Estados Unidos de América fue propuesto por Thomas Paine y se usó oficialmente por primera vez en la Declaración de Independencia, adoptada el 4 de julio de 1776. Se suele decir de forma abreviada Estados Unidos. En ocasiones se le llama incorrectamente Estados Unidos de Norteamérica, derivando en una confusión en su gentilicio. En español, no es aceptable el empleo de Norteamérica como forma abreviada del nombre de este país, ya que hay otras naciones que comparten el subcontinente norteamericano. De modo análogo, tampoco debe emplearse América para referirse en exclusiva a los Estados Unidos, aun cuando sea una costumbre muy extendida entre los anglohablantes emplear el nombre del continente como forma abreviada del nombre de la nación. Al escribir, se suele utilizar la abreviatura EE. UU. (obligatoriamente con espacio intermedio y puntos por ser una abreviatura y no una sigla) y, en menor medida, la sigla EUA. En español es totalmente incorrecto, aunque frecuente, el uso de la sigla inglesa USA.[3
404 La fecha oficial de la fundación de los Estados Unidos es el 4 de julio de 1776, cuando el Segundo Congreso Continental, representando a las 13 colonias británicas secesionistas, firmó la Declaración de Independencia. Sin embargo, la estructura del gobierno sufrió un gran cambio en 1788 cuando los Artículos de la Confederación fueron sustituidos por la Constitución de los Estados Unidos. La fecha en la que cada estado adoptó la Constitución se tiende a tomar como la fecha en que se fundó la Unión propiamente dicha.
405 La ciudad de Nueva York fue la capital federal por un año, antes de que el gobierno se trasladara a Filadelfia. En 1791, los estados ratificaron la Carta de Derechos, diez enmiendas a la Constitución federal que prohíben la restricción de las libertades personales y garantizan una serie de protecciones legales. Los estados del Norte abolieron la esclavitud entre 1780 y 1804, dejando a los esclavistas de los estados del Sur como defensores de la "peculiar institución". En 1800, el gobierno federal trasladó a la recién fundada Washington, DC.
406 En su afán por ampliar su territorio hacia el oeste, el estado comenzó un ciclo de guerras indias que se extendío hasta finales del siglo XIX, despojando a los nativos americanos de sus tierras. La Compra de Louisiana francesa prácticamente duplicó el tamaño de la nación. La guerra de 1812, contra Gran Bretaña que se terminó en un empate, ayudó al fortalecimiento del nacionalismo estadounidense. El concepto de Destino Manifiesto se popularizó durante este tiempo. El Tratado de Oregón 1846 con Gran Bretaña llevó a los Estados Unidos a tomar el control de la actual América del Noroeste. La intervención estadounidense en México de 1848 tuvo como resultado la cesión de California y gran parte de la actual América Suroeste. La Fiebre del Oro de California de 1848-1849 impulso aún más la migración occidental. En medio siglo, hasta 40 millones de búfalos, fueron sacrificados para las pieles y la carne y para facilitar la propagación de los ferrocarriles. La pérdida de estos animales, un recurso económico fundamental para los indios de las llanuras, fue un golpe existencial para las culturas nativas.
407 Las tensiones entre estados pro-esclavistas y los abolicionistas, junto al aumento de los desacuerdos en la relación entre el gobierno federal y los estatales provocó conflictos violentos en la expansión de la esclavitud en los nuevos estados. Abraham Lincoln, candidato del Partido Republicano y un gran abolicionista, fue elegido presidente en 1860. Antes de que tomase posesión de su cargo, los siete estados esclavistas declararon su secesión de los Estados Unidos, formando los Estados Confederados de América. El gobierno federal arguyó que la secesión era ilegal, y pronto se produjo el ataque por parte de los secesionistas a Fort Sumter, iniciándose así la Guerra Civil Estadounidense.
408 Tras la victoria de la Unión en 1865, se añadieron tres enmiendas a la constitución para garantizar la libertad de los casi cuatro millones de afroamericanos que habían sido esclavos, convirtiéndolos en ciudadanos y dándoles el derecho de voto. La guerra y su resolución dio lugar a un aumento sustancial de las competencias del gobierno federal.
409 Tras la guerra tuvo lugar el asesinato del Presidente Lincoln, durante la época conocida como la Reconstrucción en la cual se desarrollaron políticas encaminadas a la reintegración y la reconstrucción de los estados sureños garantizando al mismo tiempo los derechos de los nuevos esclavos liberados. Las controvertidas elecciones presidenciales de 1876 se resolvieron mediante el Compromiso de 1877, por el cual los demócratas sureños reconocieron como presidente a Rutherford B. Hayes a cambio de que éste retirara las tropas que aún permanecían desplegadas en Louisiana, Carolina del Sur y Florida.
410 A partir de 1876 empiezan a aplicarse las llamadas leyes de Jim Crow, cuya filosofía perduraría hasta 1965 en algunos casos y mediante las cuales se aplicaba la filosofía "iguales pero separados" a la convivencia entre negros y blancos.
411 En el Norte, la urbanización sin precedentes y una afluencia de inmigrantes aceleró la industrialización del país. La ola de la inmigración, que duró hasta 1929, proporcionó mano de obra para los negocios de los Estados Unidos, transformado a su cultura. Alta protección arancelaria, la creación de infraestructuras nacionales, y los nuevos reglamentos bancarios alentó el crecimiento industrial. En 1867 se produce la compra de Alaska a Rusia, completando la expansión continental del país. La Masacre de Wounded Knee en 1890 fue el último gran conflicto armado contra los nativos indios americanos. En 1893, la monarquía indígena en el Pacífico Reino de Hawái fue derrocado en un golpe de estado liderado por los residentes de América; El archipiélago fue anexado a los Estados Unidos en 1898. La victoria en la Guerra Hispano-Estadounidense ese mismo año, demostró que los Estados Unidos era una potencia mundial y dio lugar a la anexión de Puerto Rico y las Filipinas. Filipinas accedió a la independencia en 1956; Puerto Rico sigue siendo un Estado libre asociado de los Estados Unidos.
412 Al estallar la Primera Guerra Mundial en 1914, los Estados Unidos se mantuvo neutral. Los estadounidenses se solidarizaron con los británicos y franceses, a pesar de que muchos ciudadanos, sobre todo los originarios de Irlanda y Alemania, se opusieron a la intervención.[4] En 1917, los Estados Unidos se sumaron a los aliados, contribuyendo a la derrota de las Potencias Centrales. Reacio a participar en asuntos europeos, el Senado no ratifico el Tratado de Versalles, que estableció la Sociedad de Naciones. El país aplico una política de unilateralismo, que rayaba en el aislacionismo.[5] En 1920, el movimiento de los derechos de la mujer ganó la aprobación de una enmienda constitucional para otorgar a las mujeres el sufragio. En parte debido a su servicio en la guerra, los americanos nativos obtuvieron la ciudadanía de los Estados Unidos en la Ley de ciudadanía india de 1924.
413 Durante la mayor parte de la década de 1920, los Estados Unidos gozan de un período de prosperidad disminuyendo el desequilibrio mientras crecían las ganancias de las granjas industriales. Un aumento de la deuda y un mercado de valores inflados culminó en la caída de 1929 que desencadenó la Gran Depresión. Después de su elección como presidente en 1932, Franklin D. Roosevelt respondió con el New Deal, una serie de políticas de aumento de la intervención del gobierno en la economía. La Dust Bowl de mediados de los años 1930 dejo varias comunidades de agricultores empobrecidos y estimulado una nueva ola de migración occidental. La nación se recupero de la depresión económica, hasta la movilización industrial estimuladada por su entrada en la Segunda Guerra Mundial. Los Estados Unidos, oficialmente neutral durante las primeras etapas de la guerra, se inició el suministro de material a los aliados en marzo de 1941 a través del Programa de Préstamo y Arriendo.
414 El 7 de diciembre de 1941, los Estados Unidos se unieron a los Aliados contra las Potencias del Eje después de un ataque japonés a Pearl Harbor. La Segunda Guerra Mundial impulsó la economía mediante el suministro de capital de inversión y puestos de trabajo, mientras que muchas mujeres entraron en el mercado laboral. Entre los principales combatientes, los Estados Unidos es la única nación que se enriqueció a causa de la guerra.[6] Las conferencias en Bretton Woods y Yalta y esbozarón un nuevo sistema de las organizaciones internacionales colocando a los Estados Unidos y Unión Soviética en el centro de los asuntos mundiales. Cuando llego el fin de la Segunda Guerra Mundial en Europa, una conferencia internacional 1945 celebrada en San Francisco produjo la Carta de las Naciones Unidas, que entro en vigor después de la guerra.[7] Los Estados Unidos, después de haber desarrollado la primera de las armas nucleares, la utilizó en las ciudades japonesas de Hiroshima y Nagasaki en agosto. Japón se rindió el 2 de septiembre, poniendo fin a la guerra.[8
415 Estados Unidos participó en la guerra del Vietnam, donde finalmente después de una sangrienta lucha, que causó gran número de bajas en ambos bandos, Estados Unidos fue derrotado. Esta guerra es considerada como el hecho más triste de la historia del país.
416 La influencia estadounidense en aspectos tales como la economía, la ciencia, tecnología, y la cultura creció a nuevos niveles. A causa de la guerra fría y el enfrentamiento político, ideológico y social que produjo con los países socialistas, particularmente la Unión Soviética, el papel de los asuntos militares e internacionales creció en la política de esa época.
417 También en esa época tuvieron lugar eventos importantes, como el Movimiento por Derechos Civiles en los años 1950 y 60, y el alunizaje de Apollo XI en 1969.
418 Con el desplome de la Unión Soviética en 1991, los Estados Unidos pasaron a ser la única superpotencia del mundo. Los atentados del 11 de septiembre de 2001 quebraron todas esperanzas por un nuevo milenio apacible, y fueron la justificación por la invasión de Afganistán de 2001 y la Guerra contra el terrorismo. La amenaza del terrorismo ha llegado a ser una gran fuerza en la política del país, y en 2003, formó en gran parte la justificación, junto a la luego no confirmada posesión de armas nucleares por la Invasión de Iraq. El asunto dominante de la política actual sigue siendo la lucha entre las necesidades por la seguridad nacional y el mantenimiento del espionaje interno en la población a través de la controvertida ley "Patriot Act".
419 Estados Unidos es una república constitucional, presidencial y federal. Su gobierno tiene unos poderes limitados enumerados en la Constitución de los Estados Unidos. Su forma de gobierno es conocida como democracia presidencialista porque hay un presidente. La elección del presidente es indirecta a través de compromisarios o grandes electores.
420 Los poderes del presidente alcanzan no sólo la jefatura del Estado, sino también el poder ejecutivo y la capacidad de veto de algunas decisiones del poder legislativo. Hay tres niveles del gobierno: el nivel federal, el nivel estatal, y el nivel local. Los líderes de estas administraciones territoriales son elegidos por votantes por sufragio universal o designados por otros oficiales elegidos. Casi todos los oficios se deciden por una pluralidad de votos para un candidato. Los candidatos ganan las elecciones, no los partidos políticos, cuya influencia y organización es menor que en otros sistemas democráticos como los de Europa. Todos los estadounidenses tienen derecho al voto a partir de los 18 años. Existen límites en el derecho de voto para quienes están en prisión por cometer crímenes que lleven aparejada como pena accesoria la restricción del voto; en algunos estados la legislación penal y penitenciaria restringe el derecho de voto aún a pesar de haber cumplido la condena y los residentes de las dependencias y del distrito federal están representados sólo con un delegado al Congreso que no vota. Para ejercer el derecho a voto hay que inscribirse en un registro de votantes.
421 El país está integrado por 50 estados autónomos en su régimen interno. Los principales partidos políticos son el Partido Republicano y el Partido Demócrata, que dominan la escena política por lo que algunos consideran el sistema de este país como una democracia bipartidista. Otros partidos de menor importancia son el Partido Verde, el Partido de la Constitución y el Partido Libertario. Sin embargo prácticamente no tienen representatividad en virtud de que el partido Demócrata y el Republicano tienen más del 95% de la representación territorial.
422 El poder ejecutivo está encabezado por el Presidente quien, junto con el Vicepresidente, es elegido en elecciones nacionales cada cuatro años (en años divisibles por cuatro). El proceso de elección de un presidente de Estados Unidos es único. Los estadounidenses votan por planillas de electores presidenciales que igualan en número a los senadores y representantes que los Estados tienen en el Congreso (un total de 535 personas). En cada estado, el candidato con mayor número de votos gana todos los votos electorales de ese estado, con la excepción de Nebraska y Maine, en donde se reparten de manera proporcional al número de votos recibidos. El candidato presidencial necesita 270 votos electorales para ser elegido: si ningún candidato obtiene mayoría, la Cámara de Representantes toma la decisión. (En todas las otras elecciones locales y estatales, los electores votan directamente por el candidato o el referéndum presentado en la boleta electoral de que se trate). Cualquier ciudadano por nacimiento, de 35 años o más, puede ser elegido para este cargo. El presidente propone proyectos de ley al Congreso, hace cumplir las leyes federales, es comandante en jefe de las fuerzas armadas, y con la aprobación del Senado, formula tratados y designa a los jueces federales, los embajadores y otros miembros de las secretarías del ejecutivo (los ministerios de Estado, Defensa, Comercio, Justicia, etc.). Cada titular de una secretaría recibe el nombre de secretario y todos ellos forman un consejo llamado gabinete.
423 El vicepresidente, elegido del mismo partido político del presidente, actúa como presidente del Senado y en el caso de muerte o de incapacidad del presidente asume la presidencia hasta terminar el período.
424 El poder legislativo se compone de dos cámaras: el Senado y la Cámara de Representantes. Los 435 escaños de la Cámara de Representantes se distribuyen porcentualmente por la cantidad de la población, aunque todos los estados tienen por lo menos un representante. Cada estado elige dos miembros de los 100 que integran el Senado: el período de gestión de un senador es de seis años.
425 Ambas cámaras deben aprobar un proyecto de ley para que éste se convierta en ley, pero el presidente puede vetarlo o negarse a firmarlo. En ese caso, el Congreso reconsidera el proyecto de ley. Si dos terceras partes de los miembros de ambas cámaras lo aprueban, el proyecto de ley se convierte en ley, aun sin la firma del presidente.
426 El poder judicial está compuesto por los tribunales federales de distrito (al menos uno en cada estado), 11 tribunales federales de apelación, y la Corte Suprema. Los jueces federales son nombrados por el presidente con la aprobación del Senado; para minimizar las influencias políticas, los nombramientos son de por vida. Los tribunales federales deciden casos relacionados con la ley federal, conflictos entre estados o entre ciudadanos de distintos estados. Un estadounidense que sienta que ha sido sentenciado bajo una ley injusta, puede apelar y llevar su caso hasta la Corte Suprema, la cual puede decidir que la ley es inconstitucional. En ese caso la ley queda anulada.
427 Para enmendar la Constitución, la enmienda propuesta debe ser aprobada en el Congreso por una mayoría de dos terceras partes de cada cámara, y a la votación deben asistir al menos tres cuartas partes de los estados. En más de 195 años, la Constitución ha sido enmendada en 27 ocasiones. Las primeras 10 enmiendas (la Declaración de Derechos) garantizan las libertades individuales: de religión, de reunión, de expresión, el derecho a un juicio justo, el respeto a la vivienda de cada uno. Las enmiendas posteriores narran la lucha de Estados Unidos por la igualdad la justicia para todo su pueblo. Estas enmiendas han abolido la esclavitud, prohíben cualquier negación de derechos debido a la raza, otorgan el voto a la mujer y los ciudadanos del Distrito de Columbia, y permiten a los ciudadanos votar a los 18 años.
428 En la firma y ratificación de la Convención contra la Tortura y Otros Tratos o Penas Crueles, Inhumanos o Degradantes, Estados Unidos ha reconocido la competencia de recibir y procesar comunicaciones individuales por parte del Comité para la Eliminación de Discriminación Racial.
429 No ha firmado ni ratificado (como Rusia, China, India, Israel, Chile, Cuba e Iraq) el Estatuto de la Corte Penal Internacional. El asunto es polémico ya que, en agosto de 2002, el Congreso de los Estados Unidos aprobó la American Service members Protection Act (Ley para la protección de personal de servicios exteriores estadounidense o (ASPA) con el claro objetivo de debilitar a la Corte. Sin embargo, las críticas internacionales a estas medidas la han dejado casi sin efecto.
430 Estados Unidos es una federación de 50 estados, más algunas otras entidades dependientes, con una extensión total cercana a los diez millones de kilómetros cuadrados. Los estados se distribuyen casi totalmente en el continente de América del Norte, salvo Hawái, que geográficamente hablando se encuentra en Oceanía. La ciudad de Washington, en el Distrito de Columbia es la sede del gobierno federal.
431 Adicionalmente los Estados Unidos disponen de dependencias que incluyen a estados libres asociados a los Estados Unidos o demás territorios no incorporados. No se consideran parte del país, pero al no tener representación diplomática, moneda, ni defensa propias, no se trata tampoco de estados independientes. Los puertorriqueños son legalmente ciudadanos estadounidenses, pero no pueden, por ejemplo, elegir el presidente de la república mientras residan en la isla. Estados Unidos no las considera colonias, aunque así figuran en la Carta de Descolonización de la ONU.
432 Los Estados Unidos tienen una economía mixta capitalista, que es alimentada por abundantes recursos naturales, una infraestructura desarrollada, y una alta productividad. De acuerdo con el Fondo Monetario Internacional, el PIB los Estados Unidos es de más de $ 13 billones y constituye más del 25,5% del producto bruto mundial a tipos de cambio del mercado y más del 19% del producto bruto mundial en paridad de poder adquisitivo (PPA).[23] Es el PIB nacional más grande en el mundo, siendo inferior al PIB combinado de la Unión Europea y a su PPA en 2006.[24] Los Estados Unidos ocupan el undécimo lugar en la lista de países por PIB nominal per cápita y el octavo en la de países por PIB a valores de PPA per cápita. Los Estados Unidos es el mayor importador de bienes y tercer mayor exportador. Canadá, México, China, Japón y Alemania son sus principales socios comerciales.[25] El principal producto de exportación es la maquinaria eléctrica, mientras que los vehículos constituyen la principal importación.[26] La deuda nacional es el más grande del mundo; equivaliendo en 2005 al 23% del total mundial.[27] Como porcentaje del PIB, la deuda de los Estados Unidos ocupa el trigésimo lugar entre los 120 países sobre los cuales se dispone de datos.[28]
433 Estados Unidos tiene ricos recursos minerales con extensos yacimientos de oro, petróleo, carbón, y uranio. Las industrias agrícolas son los principales productores del país de maíz, trigo, azúcar, y tabaco, entre otros productores. El sector manufacturero produce, entre otras cosas, automóviles, aviones, armamento y electrónicos. La industria más grande es ahora el sector servicios en cual trabajan unos tres cuartos de los residentes. La actividad económica varía bastante en las diferentes regiones del país.
434 Varios países han enlazado su moneda con el dólar estadounidense (como la República Popular China), y otros lo han adoptado como su propia moneda, como Panamá, Ecuador y El Salvador, por ejemplo, lo cual ha fortalecido a una economía que actualmente es cada vez más vulnerable.
435 En 2003, los Estados Unidos figuraron como el tercero de los destinos turísticos más visitados; sus 40,4 millones de visitantes son menos que los 75 millones de Francia y los 52,5 millones de España.
436 Han aparecido nuevas señales de que la recesión que comenzó en diciembre de 2007 ha dejado de profundizarse. Entre las cifras recientes se cuentan las ventas minoristas que cayeron apenas 0,1% después de un salto de 1,8% en enero. La construcción de casas se incrementó 22% en febrero a una tasa anual estacionalizada de 583.000 frente al mes anterior. Las ventas de casas nuevas subieron 4,7% en febrero, dijo el gobierno esta semana. Una parte del PIB sube fuertemente. El gasto federal se incrementó 7,0% en el cuarto trimestre, un salto mayor al 6,7% esperado. Los gastos del tercer trimestre subieron 13,8%. El gobierno estadounidense ha estado gastando dinero para aliviar el golpe de la recesión y rescatar a Wall Street. Sin embargo, los gastos de los gobiernos locales y estatales cayeron 2,0%.[29
437 Los Estados Unidos están compuestos étnicamente por un 74,7% (224,1 millones) de blancos, 12,1% (36,3 millones) afroamericanos, 4,3% (12,9 millones) asiáticos y 0,8% (2,4 millones) de amerindios. Personas de otras razas constituyen el 6,0% (18 millones) y otras con dos o más razas constituyen el 1,9% (5,7 millones).[32] Otra estadística muestra a las personas blancas europeas o descendientes de europeos, constituyendo el 66,8% (200,4 millones) de la población total, mientras que la población latina de cualquier raza forman el 14,5% (43,5 millones) de la población total.
438 La esperanza media de vida al nacer en Estados Unidos es de 77,1 años (80 años las mujeres y 74,4 años los hombres). En 2003 la población menor de 5 años representaba un 6,8% (19.769 millones) del total frente al 12,4% (35.919 millones) de los mayores de 64 años. La mayoría de la población es femenina. Según el censo de 2000 representaban el 50,9% (143,5 millones) del total, 16 millones más que en la década anterior. Las mujeres que tienen 85 años o más superan en número a los hombres (3,0 millones de mujeres en comparación a los 1,2 millones de varones). En cambio, la población de menos de 18 años es de 37 millones de hombres y 35,1 millones de mujeres. En 2000, la población masculina es mayor que la femenina hasta el grupo de edad de los 30-34 años, aunque a partir del grupo de edad de los 35-39 años las mujeres superan a los hombres. Aunque donde las diferencias son más notorias es en los mayores de 65 años. Hay más mujeres que hombres y la diferencia es de 6 millones de personas (20,7 millones en comparación a los 14,3 millones de hombres).
439 La densidad de población en Estados Unidos era de 32 habitantes por kilómetro cuadrado en 2004. La mayor densidad de población se encuentra en el noreste de los Estados Unidos, entre los Grandes Lagos y el océano Atlántico. Allí están ubicadas varias de las ciudades estadounidenses más grandes, como Nueva York, Chicago o Filadelfia. Ésta es el área más antigua donde se establecieron las primeras colonias inglesas a partir de las cuales se formaron los Estados Unidos. Otra gran concentración de la población se encuentra en la costa oeste, en el estado de California, donde se encuentran ciudades como Los Ángeles, San Francisco y San Diego.
440 Según el censo de los Estados Unidos del 2000, la población se distribuía de la siguiente forma: 54 millones de personas en el noreste (19%), 64 millones en los estados centrales del norte (22,9%), 100 millones en el sur (35,6%) y 63 millones en el oeste (22,5%). La mitad de la población estadounidense vivía en zonas suburbanas. Casi una tercera parte de los estadounidenses (29,9%) vivía en zonas metropolitanas con más de 5 millones de residentes a finales del siglo XX. El mayor incremento de población en los últimos años ha ocurrido en los estados de California, Texas y Florida.
441 La población estadounidense se ha cuadruplicado en un siglo. De los 76 millones de habitantes que vivían en 1900 se ha pasado a la cifra de 300 millones de habitantes en el año 2006, según la Oficina del Censo de los Estados Unidos el país tiene un crecimiento anual de la población del 0,92%.
442 Durante el siglo XX la inmigración fue de más de 40 millones de personas. En el 2004 la tasa de inmigración neta estimada era de 4,4 emigrantes por cada 1.000 personas. En el mismo período, nacieron 330 millones de bebes. En 2002 la tasa de fertilidad fue de 64,8 nacimientos por 1.000 mujeres de entre 15 y 44 años. Asimismo, el 34% de total de nacimientos procedían de madres solteras.
443 Alrededor de 165 millones de personas murieron en el siglo XX. En 2002 se registraron 2.443.387 defunciones que representaron una tasa de mortalidad de 8,5 fallecidos por cada 1.000 habitantes. Las dos principales causas de muerte fueron las enfermedades del corazón (28,5%) y el cáncer (22,8%) las cuales representaron el 51,3% del total de muertes en ese año.
444 A principios del siglo XX, la población estadounidense estaba en una media de edad de 23 años, lo que hacía que se considerase como un país joven. En la actualidad, la media se sitúa en los 35,3 años, la más alta de todos los tiempos. La pirámide de edad de la población estadounidense ha tomado una forma más rectangular, es decir, más estable, en 2000 que en 1900 cuando ésta era en su totalidad progresiva. Las proporciones no empiezan a decaer en cada grupo de edad hasta después de las edades de 35-39 años (que corresponde esencialmente a la gente que nació entre 1960 y 1964). Algunas variaciones en la pirámide ocurren en el rango de edades de 20 a 29 años, donde se observa un entrada en ésta. Esto es consecuencia de los pocos nacimientos que se dieron lugar en los setenta debido, seguramente, a la aparición de la píldora anticonceptiva.
445 Durante este siglo, la población de más de 65 años se ha multiplicado por diez. En 1900 eran 3,1 millones y en 2000 fueron 35,0 millones de personas. En la actualidad son 37 millones. Asimismo, se producirá un rápido crecimiento de la población mayor de 64 años en 2011, cuando la primera generación del baby-boom alcance la edad de 65 años. Según las proyecciones Oficina del Censo llegarían a la cifra de 40.244.000 de personas en 2010.
446 En el siglo XX y lo que llevamos del XXI, los Estados Unidos han sido una gran potencia cultural mundial, pero, a pesar de grandes luminarias tales como William Faulkner, Frank Lloyd Wright o Jackson Pollock, sus grandes aportaciones al patrimonio global (y las que más ha exportado) no han de buscarse en las artes tradicionales, sino en la ciencia, la tecnología, y en tres de las llamadas artes populares, consideradas genuinamente estadounidenses: el cine, la historieta y la música popular (folk).
447 Estados Unidos no posee un idioma oficial a nivel federal. Sin embargo, el idioma predominante, en el cual está escrita la Constitución y las leyes, y en el que se realizan los quehaceres del gobierno, es el inglés. Se hablan, sin embargo, cientos de otros idiomas y dialectos, siendo el español el más común entre ellos, idioma que además posee reconocimiento oficial en algunas jurisdicciones del suroeste, teniendo en ellas iguales privilegios que el inglés.
448 Tradicionalmente en las ciudades grandes han existido barrios en los que la primera generación de inmigrantes de un país determinado se agrupan y luego sucesivas generaciones van dejando el lugar. Una notable excepción son los barrios chinos, Chinatowns, siendo el más importante el que se encuentra en la ciudad de San Francisco, California.
449 Después de décadas de represión, las lenguas de los americanos nativos, o lenguas amerindias, están siendo conservadas y enseñadas dentro de las reservas. Un caso singular dentro de los Estados Unidos es el estado libre asociado de Puerto Rico, que tuvo como único idioma oficial el español, y luego incorporó el idioma inglés.
450 El idioma español en Estados Unidos es empleado por más de 28 millones de personas como lengua común en el trabajo y en el hogar según el censo de 2000. Actualmente, el 17,5% de la población estadounidense es de origen hispano, y cerca del 82% de los hispanos conserva la lengua española. La mayoría de los estados del sur, noroeste y noreste de los Estados Unidos, tiene al español como segunda lengua de uso común, aún sin ser reconocida como oficial.
451 Earth (pronounced en-us-earth.ogg /ɝːθ/ (help·info))[10] is the third planet from the Sun. Earth is the largest of the terrestrial planets in the Solar System in diameter, mass and density. It is also referred to as the World and Terra.[note 3]
452 Home to millions of species,[11] including humans, Earth is the only place in the universe where life is known to exist. The planet formed 4.54 billion years ago,[12][13][14][15] and life appeared on its surface within a billion years. Since then, Earth's biosphere has significantly altered the atmosphere and other abiotic conditions on the planet, enabling the proliferation of aerobic organisms as well as the formation of the ozone layer which, together with Earth's magnetic field, blocks harmful radiation, permitting life on land.[16] The physical properties of the Earth, as well as its geological history and orbit, allowed life to persist during this period. The world is expected to continue supporting life for another 1.5 billion years, after which the rising luminosity of the Sun will eliminate the biosphere.[17]
453 Earth's outer surface is divided into several rigid segments, or tectonic plates, that gradually migrate across the surface over periods of many millions of years. About 71% of the surface is covered with salt-water oceans, the remainder consisting of continents and islands; liquid water, necessary for all known life, is not known to exist on any other planet's surface.[note 4][note 5] Earth's interior remains active, with a thick layer of relatively solid mantle, a liquid outer core that generates a magnetic field, and a solid iron inner core.
454 Earth interacts with other objects in outer space, including the Sun and the Moon. At present, Earth orbits the Sun once for every roughly 366.26 times it rotates about its axis. This length of time is a sidereal year, which is equal to 365.26 solar days.[note 6] The Earth's axis of rotation is tilted 23.4° away from the perpendicular to its orbital plane,[18] producing seasonal variations on the planet's surface with a period of one tropical year (365.24 solar days). Earth's only known natural satellite, the Moon, which began orbiting it about 4.53 billion years ago, provides ocean tides, stabilizes the axial tilt and gradually slows the planet's rotation. Between approximately 4.1 and 3.8 billion years ago, asteroid impacts during the Late Heavy Bombardment caused significant changes to the surface environment.
455 Both the mineral resources of the planet, as well as the products of the biosphere, contribute resources that are used to support a global human population. The inhabitants are grouped into about 200 independent sovereign states, which interact through diplomacy, travel, trade and military action. Human cultures have developed many views of the planet, including personification as a deity, a belief in a flat Earth, and a modern perspective of the world as an integrated environment that requires stewardship.
456 Scientists have been able to reconstruct detailed information about the planet's past. The earliest dated solar system material is dated to 4.5672 ± 0.0006 billion years ago,[19] and by 4.54 billion years ago (within an uncertainty of 1%)[12][13][14][15] the Earth and the other planets in the Solar System formed out of the solar nebula—a disk-shaped mass of dust and gas left over from the formation of the Sun. This assembly of the Earth through accretion was largely completed within 10–20 million years.[20] Initially molten, the outer layer of the planet Earth cooled to form a solid crust when water began accumulating in the atmosphere. The Moon formed soon afterward, most likely as the result of a Mars-sized object (sometimes called Theia) with about 10% of the Earth's mass[21] impacting the Earth in a glancing blow.[22] Some of this object's mass would have merged with the Earth and a portion would have been ejected into space, but enough material would have been sent into orbit to form the Moon.
457 Outgassing and volcanic activity produced the primordial atmosphere. Condensing water vapor, augmented by ice and liquid water delivered by asteroids and the larger proto-planets, comets, and trans-Neptunian objects produced the oceans.[23] Two major models have been proposed for the rate of continental growth:[24] steady growth to the present-day[25] and rapid growth early in Earth history.[26] Current research shows that the second option is most likely, with rapid initial growth of continental crust[27] followed by a long-term steady continental area.[28][29][30] On time scales lasting hundreds of millions of years, the surface continually reshaped itself as continents formed and broke up. The continents migrated across the surface, occasionally combining to form a supercontinent. Roughly 750 million years ago (mya), one of the earliest known supercontinents, Rodinia, began to break apart. The continents later recombined to form Pannotia, 600–540 mya, then finally Pangaea, which broke apart 180 mya.[31]
458 At present, Earth provides the only example of an environment that can sustain the evolution of life.[32] Highly energetic chemistry is believed to have produced a self-replicating molecule around 4 billion years ago, and half a billion years later the last common ancestor of all life existed.[33] The development of photosynthesis allowed the Sun's energy to be harvested directly by life forms; the resultant oxygen accumulated in the atmosphere and formed in a layer of ozone (a form of molecular oxygen [O3]) in the upper atmosphere. The incorporation of smaller cells within larger ones resulted in the development of complex cells called eukaryotes.[34] True multicellular organisms formed as cells within colonies became increasingly specialized. Aided by the absorption of harmful ultraviolet radiation by the ozone layer, life colonized the surface of Earth.[35]
459 Since the 1960s, it has been hypothesized that severe glacial action between 750 and 580 mya, during the Neoproterozoic, covered much of the planet in a sheet of ice. This hypothesis has been termed "Snowball Earth", and is of particular interest because it preceded the Cambrian explosion, when multicellular life forms began to proliferate.[36]
460 Following the Cambrian explosion, about 535 mya, there have been five mass extinctions.[37] The last extinction event was 65 mya, when a meteorite collision probably triggered the extinction of the (non-avian) dinosaurs and other large reptiles, but spared small animals such as mammals, which then resembled shrews. Over the past 65 million years, mammalian life has diversified, and several mya, an African ape-like animal gained the ability to stand upright.[38] This enabled tool use and encouraged communication that provided the nutrition and stimulation needed for a larger brain. The development of agriculture, and then civilization, allowed humans to influence the Earth in a short time span as no other life form had,[39] affecting both the nature and quantity of other life forms.
461 The present pattern of ice ages began about 40 mya and then intensified during the Pleistocene about 3 mya. The polar regions have since undergone repeated cycles of glaciation and thaw, repeating every 40–100,000 years. The last ice age ended 10,000 years ago.[40]
462 The future of the planet is closely tied to that of the Sun. As a result of the steady accumulation of helium ash at the Sun's core, the star's total luminosity will slowly increase. The luminosity of the Sun will grow by 10 percent over the next 1.1 Gyr (1.1 billion years) and by 40% over the next 3.5 Gyr.[41] Climate models indicate that the rise in radiation reaching the Earth is likely to have dire consequences, including the possible loss of the planet's oceans.[42]
463 The Earth's increasing surface temperature will accelerate the inorganic CO2 cycle, reducing its concentration to the lethal levels for plants (10 ppm for C4 photosynthesis) in 900 million years. The lack of vegetation will result in the loss of oxygen in the atmosphere, so animal life will become extinct within several million more years.[43] But even if the Sun were eternal and stable, the continued internal cooling of the Earth would have resulted in a loss of much of its atmosphere and oceans due to reduced volcanism.[44] After another billion years all surface water will have disappeared[17] and the mean global temperature will reach 70°C.[43] The Earth is expected to be effectively habitable for about another 500 million years.[45]
464 The Sun, as part of its evolution, will become a red giant in about 5 Gyr. Models predict that the Sun will expand out to about 250 times its present radius, roughly 1 AU (150,000,000 km).[41][46] Earth's fate is less clear. As a red giant, the Sun will lose roughly 30% of its mass, so, without tidal effects, the Earth will move to an orbit 1.7 AU (250,000,000 km) from the Sun when the star reaches it maximum radius. Therefore, the planet is expected to escape envelopment by the expanded Sun's sparse outer atmosphere, though most, if not all, remaining life will be destroyed because of the Sun's increased luminosity.[41] However, a more recent simulation indicates that Earth's orbit will decay due to tidal effects and drag, causing it to enter the red giant Sun's atmosphere and be destroyed.[46]
465 Earth is a terrestrial planet, meaning that it is a rocky body, rather than a gas giant like Jupiter. It is the largest of the four solar terrestrial planets, both in terms of size and mass. Of these four planets, Earth also has the highest density, the highest surface gravity, the strongest magnetic field, and fastest rotation.[47] It also is the only terrestrial planet with active plate tectonics.[48]
466 The shape of the Earth is very close to that of an oblate spheroid, a sphere squished along the orientation from pole to pole such that there is a bulge around the equator.[49] This bulge results from the rotation of the Earth, and causes the diameter at the equator to be 43 km larger than the pole to pole diameter.[50] The average diameter of the reference spheroid is about 12,742 km, which is approximately 40,000 km/π, as the meter was originally defined as 1/10,000,000 of the distance from the equator to the North Pole through Paris, France.[51]
467 Local topography deviates from this idealized spheroid, though on a global scale, these deviations are very small: Earth has a tolerance of about one part in about 584, or 0.17%, from the reference spheroid, which is less than the 0.22% tolerance allowed in billiard balls.[52] The largest local deviations in the rocky surface of the Earth are Mount Everest (8,848 m above local sea level) and the Mariana Trench (10,911 m below local sea level). Because of the equatorial bulge, the feature farthest from the center of the Earth is actually Mount Chimborazo in Ecuador.[53][54]
468 The mass of the Earth is approximately 5.98 × 1024 kg. It is composed mostly of iron (32.1%), oxygen (30.1%), silicon (15.1%), magnesium (13.9%), sulfur (2.9%), nickel (1.8%), calcium (1.5%), and aluminium (1.4%); with the remaining 1.2% consisting of trace amounts of other elements. Due to mass segregation, the core region is believed to be primarily composed of iron (88.8%), with smaller amounts of nickel (5.8%), sulfur (4.5%), and less than 1% trace elements.[55]
469 The geochemist F. W. Clarke calculated that a little more than 47% of the Earth's crust consists of oxygen. The more common rock constituents of the Earth's crust are nearly all oxides; chlorine, sulfur and fluorine are the only important exceptions to this and their total amount in any rock is usually much less than 1%. The principal oxides are silica, alumina, iron oxides, lime, magnesia, potash and soda. The silica functions principally as an acid, forming silicates, and all the commonest minerals of igneous rocks are of this nature. From a computation based on 1,672 analyses of all kinds of rocks, Clarke deduced that 99.22% were composed of 11 oxides (see the table at right.) All the other constituents occur only in very small quantities.[note 7]
470 The interior of the Earth, like that of the other terrestrial planets, is divided into layers by their chemical or physical (rheological) properties. The outer layer of the Earth is a chemically-distinct silicate solid crust, which is underlain by a highly viscous solid mantle. The crust is separated from the mantle by the Mohorovičić discontinuity, and the thickness of the crust varies: averaging 6 km under the oceans and 30–50 km on the continents. The crust and the cold, rigid, top of the upper mantle are collectively known as the lithosphere, and it is of the lithosphere that the tectonic plates are comprised. Beneath the lithosphere is the asthenosphere, a relatively low-viscosity layer on which the lithosphere rides. Important changes in crystal structure within the mantle occur at 410 and 660 kilometers below the surface, spanning a transition zone that separates the upper and lower mantle. Beneath the mantle, an extremely low viscosity liquid outer core lies above a solid inner core.[56] The inner core may rotate at a slightly higher angular velocity than the remainder of the planet, advancing by 0.1–0.5° per year.[57]
471 The internal heat of the planet is from a combination residual heat from planetary accretion (20%) and heat produced through radioactive decay (80%).[60] The major heat-producing isotopes in the Earth are potassium-40, uranium-238, uranium-235, and thorium-232.[61] At the center of the planet, the temperature may be up to 7,000 K and the pressure could reach 360 GPa.[62] Because much of the heat is provided by radioactive decay, scientists believe that early in Earth history, before isotopes with short half-lives had been depleted, Earth's heat production would have been much higher. This extra heat production, twice present-day at approximately 3 billion years ago,[60] would have increased temperature gradients within the Earth, increasing the rates of mantle convection and plate tectonics, and allowing the production of igneous rocks such as komatiites that are not formed today.[63]
472 Total heat loss from the earth is 4.2 × 1013 Watts.[65] A portion of the core's thermal energy is transported toward the crust by Mantle plumes; a form of convection consisting of upwellings of higher-temperature rock. These plumes can produce hotspots and flood basalts.[66] More of the heat in the Earth is lost through plate tectonics, by mantle upwelling associated with mid-ocean ridges. The final major mode of heat loss is through conduction through the lithosphere, majority of which occurs in the oceans due to the crust there being much thinner than that of the continents.[65]
473 The mechanically rigid outer layer of the Earth, the lithosphere, is broken into pieces called tectonic plates. These plates are rigid segments that move in relation to one another at one of three types of plate boundaries: Convergent boundaries, at which two plates come together, Divergent boundaries, at which two plates are pulled apart, and Transform boundaries, in which two plates slide past one another laterally. Earthquakes, volcanic activity, mountain-building, and oceanic trench formation can occur along these plate boundaries.[68] The tectonic plates ride on top of the asthenosphere, the solid but less-viscous part of the upper mantle that can flow and move along with the plates,[69] and their motion is strongly coupled with patterns convection inside the Earth's mantle.
474 As the tectonic plates migrate across the planet, the ocean floor is subducted under the leading edges of the plates at convergent boundaries. At the same time, the upwelling of mantle material at divergent boundaries creates mid-ocean ridges. The combination of these processes continually recycles the oceanic crust back into the mantle. Because of this recycling, most of the ocean floor is less than 100 million years in age. The oldest oceanic crust is located in the Western Pacific, and has an estimated age of about 200 million years.[70][71] By comparison, the oldest dated continental crust is 4030 million years old.[72]
475 Other notable plates include the Indian Plate, the Arabian Plate, the Caribbean Plate, the Nazca Plate off the west coast of South America and the Scotia Plate in the southern Atlantic Ocean. The Australian Plate actually fused with Indian Plate between 50 and 55 million years ago. The fastest-moving plates are the oceanic plates, with the Cocos Plate advancing at a rate of 75 mm/yr[73] and the Pacific Plate moving 52–69 mm/yr. At the other extreme, the slowest-moving plate is the Eurasian Plate, progressing at a typical rate of about 21 mm/yr.[74]
476 The Earth's terrain varies greatly from place to place. About 70.8%[75] of the surface is covered by water, with much of the continental shelf below sea level. The submerged surface has mountainous features, including a globe-spanning mid-ocean ridge system, as well as undersea volcanoes,[50] oceanic trenches, submarine canyons, oceanic plateaus and abyssal plains. The remaining 29.2% not covered by water consists of mountains, deserts, plains, plateaus, and other geomorphologies.
477 The planetary surface undergoes reshaping over geological time periods due to the effects of tectonics and erosion. The surface features built up or deformed through plate tectonics are subject to steady weathering from precipitation, thermal cycles, and chemical effects. Glaciation, coastal erosion, the build-up of coral reefs, and large meteorite impacts[76] also act to reshape the landscape.
478 The continental crust consists of lower density material such as the igneous rocks granite and andesite. Less common is basalt, a denser volcanic rock that is the primary constituent of the ocean floors.[77] Sedimentary rock is formed from the accumulation of sediment that becomes compacted together. Nearly 75% of the continental surfaces are covered by sedimentary rocks, although they form only about 5% of the crust.[78] The third form of rock material found on Earth is metamorphic rock, which is created from the transformation of pre-existing rock types through high pressures, high temperatures, or both. The most abundant silicate minerals on the Earth's surface include quartz, the feldspars, amphibole, mica, pyroxene and olivine.[79] Common carbonate minerals include calcite (found in limestone), aragonite and dolomite.[80]
479 The pedosphere is the outermost layer of the Earth that is composed of soil and subject to soil formation processes. It exists at the interface of the lithosphere, atmosphere, hydrosphere and biosphere. Currently the total arable land is 13.31% of the land surface, with only 4.71% supporting permanent crops.[6]Close to 40% of the Earth's land surface is presently used for cropland and pasture, or an estimated 1.3 × 107 km² of cropland and 3.4 × 107 km² of pastureland.[81]
480 The elevation of the land surface of the Earth varies from the low point of −418 m at the Dead Sea, to a 2005-estimated maximum altitude of 8,848 m at the top of Mount Everest. The mean height of land above sea level is 840 m.[82]
481 The abundance of water on Earth's surface is a unique feature that distinguishes the "Blue Planet" from others in the Solar System. The Earth's hydrosphere consists chiefly of the oceans, but technically includes all water surfaces in the world, including inland seas, lakes, rivers, and underground waters down to a depth of 2,000 m. The deepest underwater location is Challenger Deep of the Mariana Trench in the Pacific Ocean with a depth of −10,911.4 m.[note 11][83] The average depth of the oceans is 3,800 m, more than four times the average height of the continents.[82]
482 The mass of the oceans is approximately 1.35 × 1018 metric tons, or about 1/4400 of the total mass of the Earth, and occupies a volume of 1.386 × 109 km3. If all of the land on Earth were spread evenly, water would rise to an altitude of more than 2.7 km.[note 12] About 97.5% of the water is saline, while the remaining 2.5% is fresh water. The majority of the fresh water, about 68.7%, is currently in the form of ice.[84]
483 About 3.5% of the total mass of the oceans consists of salt. Most of this salt was released from volcanic activity or extracted from cool, igneous rocks.[85] The oceans are also a reservoir of dissolved atmospheric gases, which are essential for the survival of many aquatic life forms.[86] Sea water has an important influence on the world's climate, with the oceans acting as a large heat reservoir.[87] Shifts in the oceanic temperature distribution can cause significant weather shifts, such as the El Niño-Southern Oscillation.[88]
484 The atmospheric pressure on the surface of the Earth averages 101.325 kPa, with a scale height of about 8.5 km.[7] It is 78% nitrogen and 21% oxygen, with trace amounts of water vapor, carbon dioxide and other gaseous molecules. The height of the troposphere varies with latitude, ranging between 8 km at the poles to 17 km at the equator, with some variation due to weather and seasonal factors.[89]
485 Earth's biosphere has significantly altered its atmosphere. Oxygenic photosynthesis evolved 2.7 billion years ago, forming the primarily nitrogen-oxygen atmosphere that exists today. This change enabled the proliferation of aerobic organisms as well as the formation of the ozone layer which, together with Earth's magnetic field, blocks ultraviolet solar radiation, permitting life on land. Other atmospheric functions important to life on Earth include transporting water vapor, providing useful gases, causing small meteors to burn up before they strike the surface, and moderating temperature.[90] This last phenomenon is known as the greenhouse effect: trace molecules within the atmosphere serve to capture thermal energy emitted from the ground, thereby raising the average temperature. Carbon dioxide, water vapor, methane and ozone are the primary greenhouse gases in the Earth's atmosphere. Without this heat-retention effect, the average surface temperature would be −18 °C and life would likely not exist.[75]
486 The Earth's atmosphere has no definite boundary, slowly becoming thinner and fading into outer space. Three-quarters of the atmosphere's mass is contained within the first 11 km of the planet's surface. This lowest layer is called the troposphere. Energy from the Sun heats this layer, and the surface below, causing expansion of the air. This lower density air then rises, and is replaced by cooler, higher density air. The result is atmospheric circulation that drives the weather and climate through redistribution of heat energy.[91]
487 The primary atmospheric circulation bands consist of the trade winds in the equatorial region below 30° latitude and the westerlies in the mid-latitudes between 30° and 60°.[92] Ocean currents are also important factors in determining climate, particularly the thermohaline circulation that distributes heat energy from the equatorial oceans to the polar regions.[93]
488 Water vapor generated through surface evaporation is transported by circulatory patterns in the atmosphere. When atmospheric conditions permit an uplift of warm, humid air, this water condenses and settles to the surface as precipitation.[91] Most of the water is then transported back to lower elevations by river systems, usually returning to the oceans or being deposited into lakes. This water cycle is a vital mechanism for supporting life on land, and is a primary factor in the erosion of surface features over geological periods. Precipitation patterns vary widely, ranging from several meters of water per year to less than a millimeter. Atmospheric circulation, topological features and temperature differences determine the average precipitation that falls in each region.[94]
489 The Earth can be sub-divided into specific latitudinal belts of approximately homogeneous climate. Ranging from the equator to the polar regions, these are the tropical (or equatorial), subtropical, temperate and polar climates.[95] Climate can also be classified based on the temperature and precipitation, with the climate regions characterized by fairly uniform air masses. The commonly used Köppen climate classification system (as modified by Wladimir Köppen's student Rudolph Geiger) has five broad groups (humid tropics, arid, humid middle latitudes, continental and cold polar), which are further divided into more specific subtypes.[92]
490 Above the troposphere, the atmosphere is usually divided into the stratosphere, mesosphere, and thermosphere.[90] Each of these layers has a different lapse rate, defining the rate of change in temperature with height. Beyond these, the exosphere thins out into the magnetosphere. This is where the Earth's magnetic fields interact with the solar wind.[96] An important part of the atmosphere for life on Earth is the ozone layer, a component of the stratosphere that partially shields the surface from ultraviolet light. The Kármán line, defined as 100 km above the Earth's surface, is a working definition for the boundary between atmosphere and space.[97]
491 Due to thermal energy, some of the molecules at the outer edge of the Earth's atmosphere have their velocity increased to the point where they can escape from the planet's gravity. This results in a slow but steady leakage of the atmosphere into space. Because unfixed hydrogen has a low molecular weight, it can achieve escape velocity more readily and it leaks into outer space at a greater rate than other gasses.[98] The leakage of hydrogen into space is a contributing factor in pushing the Earth from an initially reducing state to its current oxidizing one. Photosynthesis provided a source of free oxygen, but the loss of reducing agents such as hydrogen is believed to have been a necessary precondition for the widespread accumulation of oxygen in the atmosphere.[99] Hence the ability of hydrogen to escape from the Earth's atmosphere may have influenced the nature of life that developed on the planet.[100] In the current, oxygen-rich atmosphere most hydrogen is converted into water before it has an opportunity to escape. Instead, most of the hydrogen loss comes from the destruction of methane in the upper atmosphere.[101]
492 The Earth's magnetic field is shaped roughly as a magnetic dipole, with the poles currently located proximate to the planet's geographic poles. According to dynamo theory, the field is generated within the molten outer core region where heat creates convection motions of conducting materials, generating electric currents. These in turn produce the Earth's magnetic field. The convection movements in the core are chaotic in nature, and periodically change alignment. This results in field reversals at irregular intervals averaging a few times every million years. The most recent reversal occurred approximately 700,000 years ago.[102][103]
493 The field forms the magnetosphere, which deflects particles in the solar wind. The sunward edge of the bow shock is located at about 13 times the radius of the Earth. The collision between the magnetic field and the solar wind forms the Van Allen radiation belts, a pair of concentric, torus-shaped regions of energetic charged particles. When the plasma enters the Earth's atmosphere at the magnetic poles, it forms the aurora.[104]
494 Earth's rotation period relative to the Sun—its mean solar day—is 86,400 seconds of mean solar time. Each of these seconds is slightly longer than an SI second because Earth's solar day is now slightly longer than it was during the 19th century due to tidal acceleration.[105]
495 Earth's rotation period relative to the fixed stars, called its stellar day by the International Earth Rotation and Reference Systems Service (IERS), is 86164.098903691 seconds of mean solar time (UT1), or 23h 56m 4.098903691s. [106][note 13] Earth's rotation period relative to the precessing or moving mean vernal equinox, misnamed its sidereal day, is 86164.09053083288 seconds of mean solar time (UT1) (23h 56m 4.09053083288s).[106] Thus the sidereal day is shorter than the stellar day by about 8.4 ms.[107] The length of the mean solar day in SI seconds is available from the IERS for the periods 1623–2005[108] and 1962–2005.[109]
496 Apart from meteors within the atmosphere and low-orbiting satellites, the main apparent motion of celestial bodies in the Earth's sky is to the west at a rate of 15°/h = 15'/min. This is equivalent to an apparent diameter of the Sun or Moon every two minutes; the apparent sizes of the Sun and the Moon are approximately the same.[110][111]
497 Earth orbits the Sun at an average distance of about 150 million kilometers every 365.2564 mean solar days, or one sidereal year. From Earth, this gives an apparent movement of the Sun eastward with respect to the stars at a rate of about 1°/day, or a Sun or Moon diameter every 12 hours. Because of this motion, on average it takes 24 hours—a solar day—for Earth to complete a full rotation about its axis so that the Sun returns to the meridian. The orbital speed of the Earth averages about 30 km/s (108,000 km/h), which is fast enough to cover the planet's diameter (about 12,600 km) in seven minutes, and the distance to the Moon (384,000 km) in four hours.[7]
498 The Moon revolves with the Earth around a common barycenter every 27.32 days relative to the background stars. When combined with the Earth–Moon system's common revolution around the Sun, the period of the synodic month, from new moon to new moon, is 29.53 days. Viewed from the celestial north pole, the motion of Earth, the Moon and their axial rotations are all counter-clockwise. Viewed from a vantage point above the north poles of both the Sun and the Earth, the Earth appears to revolve in a counterclockwise direction about the Sun. The orbital and axial planes are not precisely aligned: Earth's axis is tilted some 23.5 degrees from the perpendicular to the Earth–Sun plane, and the Earth–Moon plane is tilted about 5 degrees against the Earth-Sun plane. Without this tilt, there would be an eclipse every two weeks, alternating between lunar eclipses and solar eclipses.[7][112]
499 The Hill sphere, or gravitational sphere of influence, of the Earth is about 1.5 Gm (or 1,500,000 kilometers) in radius.[113][note 14] This is maximum distance at which the Earth's gravitational influence is stronger than the more distant Sun and planets. Objects must orbit the Earth within this radius, or they can become unbound by the gravitational perturbation of the Sun.
500 Earth, along with the Solar System, is situated in the Milky Way galaxy, orbiting about 28,000 light years from the center of the galaxy, and about 20 light years above the galaxy's equatorial plane in the Orion spiral arm.[114]
501 Die Erde (von indogermanisch *er[t]; lat. „Terra“; gr. „Gaia“) ist mit einer durchschnittlichen Sonnenentfernung von 149,6 Millionen km von der Sonne aus der dritte Planet im Sonnensystem. Ihr Durchmesser beträgt über 12.700 km.
502 Sie ist etwa 4,6 Milliarden Jahre alt und der einzige bekannte belebte Himmelskörper. Nach der vorherrschenden chemischen Beschaffenheit der Erde wird der Begriff der erdartigen (terrestrischen) oder auch erdähnlichen Planeten definiert.
503 Der mittlere Abstand des Zentrums der Erde vom Zentrum der Sonne ist die große Bahnhalbachse und beträgt etwa 149,6 Mio. km. Ursprünglich wurde dieser Abstand der Definition der Astronomischen Einheit (AE) zugrunde gelegt, die als astronomische Längeneinheit hauptsächlich für Entfernungsangaben innerhalb des Sonnensystems verwendet wird.
504 Zur inneren Nachbarbahn der Venus hat die Erdbahn einen mittleren Abstand von 0,28 AE (41,44 Mio. km) und bis zur äußeren Nachbarbahn des Mars sind es im Mittel 0,52 AE (78,32 Mio. km).
505 Der sonnennächste Punkt der Erdbahn, das Perihel, liegt bei 0,983 AE (147,1 Mio. km) und ihr sonnenfernster Punkt, das Aphel, bei 1,017 AE (152,1 Mio. km). Die Erde läuft also auf einer elliptischen Umlaufbahn mit einer Exzentrizität von 0,0167 um die Sonne. Der Perihel-Durchgang erfolgt um den 3. Januar und der Aphel-Durchgang um den 5. Juli. Für einen Sonnenumlauf benötigt sie 365 Tage, 6 Stunden, 9 Minuten und 9,54 Sekunden; diese Zeitspanne wird auch als siderisches Jahr bezeichnet. Die Bahngeschwindigkeit beträgt im Mittel 29,78 km/s, im Perihel 30,29 km/s und im Aphel 29,29 km/s; somit legt der Planet eine Strecke von der Größe seines Durchmessers in gut sieben Minuten zurück.
506 Der Umlaufsinn der Erde ist rechtläufig, das heißt, dass sie sich entsprechend der Regel der Drehrichtung im Sonnensystem vom Nordpol der Erdbahnebene aus gesehen dem Uhrzeigersinn entgegengesetzt um die Sonne bewegt.
507 Die Bahnebene der Erde wird Ekliptik genannt. Die Ekliptik ist um gut 7° gegen die Äquatorebene der Sonne geneigt. Der Nordpol der Sonne ist der Erde am stärksten gegen Anfang September zugewandt, der solare Südpol wiederum gegen Anfang März. Nur um den 6. Juni und den 8. Dezember befindet sich die Erde kurz in der Ebene des Sonnenäquators.
508 Die Erde rotiert rechtläufig – in Richtung Osten – in 23 Stunden, 56 Minuten und 4,09 Sekunden relativ zu den Fixsternen ein Mal um ihre eigene Achse. Analog zum siderischen Jahr wird diese Zeitspanne als ein siderischer Tag bezeichnet. Aufgrund der Bahnbewegung der Erde entlang ihrer Umlaufbahn im gleichen Drehsinn und der daraus resultierenden leicht unterschiedlichen Position der Sonne an nacheinander folgenden Tagen ist ein Sonnentag, der als die Zeitspanne zwischen zwei Sonnenhöchstständen (Mittag) definiert ist, etwas größer als ein siderischer Tag und wird nach Definition in 24 Stunden eingeteilt. Die Geschwindigkeit der Kreisbewegung des Erdäquators beträgt 464 m/s bzw. 1670 km/h.
509 Durch die Geschwindigkeit der Erdrotation und die dadurch bedingte Fliehkraft ist die Figur der Erde an den Polregionen abgeplattet und dafür gegen ihren Äquator zu einem sogenannten Äquatorwulst verformt. Gegenüber einer volumengleichen Kugel ist der Äquatorradius 7 Kilometer größer und der Polradius 14 Kilometer kleiner.
510 Die Rotationsachse der Erde ist 23,44° gegen die senkrechte Achse der Ekliptik geneigt, dadurch werden die Nord- und die Südhalbkugel der Erde an verschiedenen Punkten ihrer Umlaufbahn um die Sonne unterschiedlich beschienen, was zu den das Klima der Erde prägenden Jahreszeiten führt. Die Richtung der Achsneigung fällt für die Nordhalbkugel derzeit in die ekliptikale Länge des Sternbilds Stier. In dieser Richtung steht, von der Erde aus gesehen, am 21. Juni auch die Sonne zur Sommersonnenwende. Da die Erde zwei Wochen später ihr Aphel durchläuft, fällt der Sommer auf der Nordhalbkugel in die Zeit ihres sonnenfernen Bahnbereichs.
511 Die Gezeitenkräfte des Mondes und der Sonne bewirken an dem Äquatorwulst der Erde ein Drehmoment, das die Erdachse aufzurichten versucht und zu einer Kreiselbewegung der Rotationsachse führt. Ein vollständiger Kegelumlauf dieser lunisolaren Präzession dauert etwa 25.700 bis 25.800 Jahre. Mit diesem Zyklus der Präzession verschieben sich die Jahreszeiten. Der Mond verursacht durch die Präzessionsbewegung seiner eigenen Umlaufbahn mit einer Periode von 18,6 Jahren eine zusätzliche „nickende“ Bewegung der Erdachse, die als Nutation bezeichnet wird. Der Einfluss des Mondes bewirkt zugleich eine Stabilisierung der Erdachsenneigung, die ohne ihn durch die Anziehungskraft der Planeten bis zu einer Schräglage von 85° taumeln würde.[2]
512 Die Gravitation von Mond und Sonne verursachen auf der Erde die Gezeiten. Der Anteil von der Sonne ist dabei etwa halb so groß wie der des Mondes. Damit verbunden ist die Gezeitenreibung von Ebbe und Flut der Meere. Diese bremsen die Erdrotation und verlängern dadurch gegenwärtig die Tage um etwa 20 Mikrosekunden pro Jahr. Die Gezeiten wirken sich auch auf die Landmassen aus, die sich um etwa einen halben Meter heben und senken. Die Rotationsenergie der Erde wird dabei in Wärme umgewandelt. Der Drehimpuls wird auf den Mond übertragen, dessen Bahn sich dadurch um etwa vier Zentimeter pro Jahr von der Erde entfernt. Dieser schon lange vermutete Effekt ist seit etwa 1995 durch Laserdistanzmessungen abgesichert. Extrapoliert man diese Abbremsung in die Zukunft, wird auch die Erde einmal dem Mond immer die gleiche Seite zuwenden, wobei ein Tag auf der Erde dann etwa siebenundvierzig Mal so lang wäre wie heute. Damit unterliegt die Erde dem gleichen Effekt, der in der Vergangenheit schon zur gebundenen Rotation (Korotation) des Mondes geführt hat.
513 Die Erde ist mit einem mittleren Radius von 6371 Kilometer der größte Gesteinsplanet im Sonnensystem. Alle noch größeren Planeten der Sonne sind so genannte Gasriesen und bestehen, wie Jupiter, hauptsächlich aus Gas, das im Inneren des Planeten stark komprimiert ist. Zusammengesetzt ist die Erde hauptsächlich aus Eisen (32,1%), Sauerstoff (30,1%), Silizium (15,1%), Magnesium (13,9%), Schwefel (2,9%), Nickel (1,8%), Calcium (1,5%) und Aluminium (1,4%). Die restlichen 1,2% teilen sich Spuren von anderen Elementen.
514 Die Erde hat, wie alle Planeten, durch die Eigengravitation ihrer großen Masse (siehe auch Erdmasse) annähernd die Form einer Kugel. Durch die Fliehkräfte ihrer ziemlich schnellen Rotation ist sie an den Polen geringfügig abgeplattet. Der Durchmesser ist am Äquator etwa 43 km größer als der von Pol zu Pol. Der Gipfel des Chimborazo ist wegen seiner Nähe zum Äquator der Punkt der Erdoberfläche, der am weitesten vom Erdmittelpunkt entfernt ist.
515 Nach seismischen Messungen ist die Erde hauptsächlich aus drei Schalen aufgebaut: Aus dem Erdkern, dem Erdmantel und der Erdkruste. Diese Schalen sind durch seismische Diskontinuitätsflächen (Unstetigkeitsflächen) voneinander abgegrenzt. Die Erdkruste und der oberste Teil des oberen Mantels bilden zusammen die so genannte Lithosphäre. Sie ist zwischen 50 und 100 km dick und zergliedert sich in große und kleinere tektonische Einheiten, die Platten.
516 Der Äquatorumfang ist durch die Zentrifugalkraft der Rotation mit 40.075,004 km um 134,336 km bzw. um 0,34 % größer als der Polumfang mit 40.007,863 km. Der Poldurchmesser ist mit 12.713,500 km dementsprechend um 42,77 km bzw. um 0,34 % kleiner als der Äquatordurchmesser mit 12.756,270 km. Der Meeresspiegel (das Geoid) weicht davon nochmals um ± 100 Meter ab. Die Unterschiede im Umfang tragen mit dazu bei, dass es keinen eindeutig höchsten Berg auf der Erde gibt. Nach der Höhe über dem Meeresspiegel ist es der Mount Everest im Himalaya und nach dem Abstand des Gipfels vom Erdmittelpunkt der auf dem Äquatorwulst stehende Vulkanberg Chimborazo in den Anden. Von der jeweils eigenen Basis an gemessen ist der Mauna Kea auf der vom pazifischen Meeresboden aufragenden großen vulkanischen Hawaii-Insel am höchsten.
517 Wie die meisten festen Planeten und fast alle größeren Monde, zum Beispiel der Erdmond, weist auch die Erde eine deutliche Zweiteilung ihrer Oberfläche in unterschiedlich ausgeprägte Halbkugeln auf. Die Oberfläche von ca. 510 Mio. km² unterteilt sich in eine Landhemisphäre und eine Wasserhemisphäre. Die Landhalbkugel ist die Hemisphäre mit dem maximalen Anteil an Land. Er beträgt mit 47 % knapp die Hälfte der sichtbaren Fläche. Die Fläche der gegenüberliegenden Wasserhalbkugel enthält nur 11 % Land und wird durch Ozeane dominiert.
518 Die Wasserfläche hat in der gegenwärtigen geologischen Epoche einen Gesamtanteil von 70,7 %. Die von der Landfläche umfassten 29,3 % entfallen hauptsächlich auf sieben Kontinente; der Größe nach: Asien, Afrika, Nordamerika, Südamerika, Antarktika, Europa und Australien (Europa ist als große westliche Halbinsel Asiens im Rahmen der Plattentektonik allerdings wahrscheinlich nie eine selbständige Einheit gewesen). Die kategorische Grenzziehung zwischen Australien als kleinstem Erdteil und Grönland als größter Insel wurde nur rein konventionell festgelegt. Die Fläche des Weltmeeres wird im Allgemeinen in drei Ozeane einschließlich der Nebenmeere unterteilt: den Pazifik, den Atlantik und den Indik. Die tiefste Stelle, das Witjastief 1 im Marianengraben, liegt 11.034 m unter dem Meeresspiegel.
519 Die größten Platten entsprechen in ihrer Anzahl und Ordnung in etwa jener der von ihnen getragenen Kontinente, mit Ausnahme der pazifischen Platte. All diese Schollen bewegen sich gemäß der Plattentektonik relativ zueinander auf den teils aufgeschmolzenen, zähflüssigen Gesteinen des oberen Mantels, der 100 bis 150 km 
520 Das die Erde umgebende magnetische Feld wird von einem Geodynamo erzeugt. Das Feld ähnelt nahe der Erdoberfläche einem magnetischen Dipol. Die magnetischen Feldlinien treten auf der Südhalbkugel der Erde aus und durch die Nordhalbkugel wieder in die Erde ein. Im Erdmantel verändert sich die Form des Magnetfeldes. Oberhalb der Erdatmosphäre wird das Dipolfeld durch den Sonnenwind verformt.
521 Die geomagnetischen Pole der Erde fallen nicht genau mit den geographischen Polen der Erde zusammen. Im Jahr 2007 war die Achse des geomagnetischen Dipolfeldes um etwa 11,5° gegenüber der Erdachse geneigt.
522 Die Erde besitzt eine etwa 640 km hohe Atmosphäre. Deren Masse beträgt 5,13 x 1018 kg und macht somit knapp ein Millionstel der Erdmasse aus. Der mittlere Luftdruck auf dem Niveau des Meeresspiegels beträgt 1.013 hPa. In den bodennahen Schichten besteht die Lufthülle im Wesentlichen aus 78 % Stickstoff, 21 % Sauerstoff und zu 1 % aus Edelgasen, überwiegend Argon. Dazu kommt ein wechselnder Anteil an Wasserdampf von 0 bis 5 %, der das Wettergeschehen bestimmt. Der für den Treibhauseffekt wichtige Anteil an Kohlendioxid steigt zur Zeit durch menschlichen Einfluss und liegt jetzt bei etwa 0,038 % (Stand 2005).
523 Die auf der Erde gemessenen Temperaturextreme betragen –89,6 °C (gemessen am 21. Juli 1983 in der Wostok-Station in der Antarktis auf 3.420 Metern Höhe, was einer Temperatur von –60 °C auf Meereshöhe entspräche) und +58 °C (gemessen am 13. September 1922 in Al 'Aziziyah in Libyen auf 111 Metern Höhe). Die mittlere Temperatur in Bodennähe beträgt 15 °C; die Schallgeschwindigkeit bei dieser Temperatur beträgt in der Luft auf Meeresniveau etwa 340 m/s.
524 Die Erdatmosphäre streut den kurzwelligen, blauen Spektralanteil des Sonnenlichts etwa fünfmal stärker als den langwelligen, roten und bedingt dadurch bei hohem Sonnenstand die Blaufärbung des Himmels. Dass die Oberfläche der Meere und Ozeane vom Weltall aus gesehen blau erscheinen, weswegen die Erde seit dem Beginn der Raumfahrt auch der „Blaue Planet“ genannt wird, ist jedoch auf die stärkere Absorption roten Lichtes im Wasser selbst zurückzuführen. Die Spiegelung des blauen Himmels an der Wasseroberfläche ist dabei nur von nebensächlicher Bedeutung.
525 Ein weiteres Merkmal sind die Unterschiede zwischen Tag und Nacht, die je nach Jahreszeit stark variieren. Diese Unterschiede nehmen, je näher man dem Pol kommt, immer mehr zu.
526 Die Subtropen liegen in der geographischen Breite zwischen den Tropen in Äquatorrichtung und den gemäßigten Zonen in Richtung der Pole, ungefähr zwischen 25° und 40° nördlicher beziehungsweise südlicher Breite. Diese Gebiete haben typischerweise tropische Sommer und nicht-tropische Winter. Man kann sie unterteilen in trockene, winterfeuchte, sommerfeuchte und immerfeuchte Subtropen.
527 Eine weit verbreitete Definition definiert das Klima dort als subtropisch, wo die Mitteltemperatur im Jahr über 20 Grad Celsius liegt, die Mitteltemperatur des kältesten Monats jedoch unter der Marke von 20 Grad bleibt.
528 In den Tropen sind Tag und Nacht immer ungefähr gleichlang (zwischen 10,5 und 13,5 Stunden). Klimatische Jahreszeiten gibt es nur in den wechselfeuchten Tropen und lassen sich lediglich in Trocken- und Regenzeit unterscheiden.
529 Typisch für die wechselfeuchten Tropen sind die Feuchtsavannen, die sich nördlich und südlich der großen Regenwälder befinden. Sie zeichnen sich durch ihre weiten Grasländer aus. Beispiele sind die afrikanische Savanne und der Pantanal in Südbrasilien und Paraguay.
530 Für die immerfeuchten Tropen, die sich rund um den Äquator befinden, sind die großen, sehr artenreichen Regenwälder, wie zum Beispiel der Amazonas typisch.
531 Die Jahreszeiten werden in erster Linie von der Einstrahlung der Sonne verursacht und können infolgedessen durch Temperatur- und/oder Niederschlagsmengenschwankungen geprägt sein. In der gemäßigten Zone wird darunter gewöhnlich der Wechsel der Tageshöchst- bzw. Tagestiefsttemperaturen verstanden. In subtropischen (und noch ausgeprägter in tropischen) Regionen wird dieses Temperaturregime stärker durch Schwankungen der Monatsmittel des Niederschlags überlagert und in seiner Wahrnehmbarkeit beeinflusst.
532 Die Unterschiede entstehen durch die Neigung der Erde. Dies hat zur Folge, dass der Zenitstand der Sonne zwischen dem nördlichen und südlichen Wendekreis hin- und herwandert (daher auch der Name). Dadurch entstehen neben den unterschiedlichen Einstrahlungen auch die unterschiedlichen Tag- und Nachtlängen, die mit zunehmender Polnähe immer ausgeprägter werden.
533 21. Dezember (Wintersonnenwende): Die Sonne steht über dem südlichen Wendekreis (Wendekreis des Steinbocks). Auf der Nordhalbkugel ist nun der kürzeste und auf der Südhalbkugel der längste Tag des Jahres. Der astronomische Winter beginnt. Durch die nun geringe Einstrahlung der Sonne auf die Nordhalbkugel erreicht die mittlere (Tages- bzw. Monats-)Temperatur dort mit einiger Verzögerung ihren Tiefpunkt. Am Nordpol ist die Mitte der Polarnacht und am Südpol die Mitte des Polartags.
534 19. bis 21. März: Tagundnachtgleiche: astronomischer Frühlingsbeginn im Norden und astronomischer Herbstbeginn im Süden. Die Sonne ist auf Höhe des Äquators.
535 21. Juni (Sommersonnenwende): Die Sonne steht über dem nördlichen Wendekreis (Wendekreis des Krebses). Längster Tag im Norden und kürzester Tag im Süden. Auf der Nordhalbkugel beginnt nun der astronomische Sommer und auf der Südhalbkugel der astronomische Winter. Durch die höhere Einstrahlung der Sonne auf die Nordhalbkugel erreicht die mittlere (Tages- bzw. Monats-)Temperatur dort mit einiger Verzögerung ihren Höchstpunkt. Am Nordpol ist die Mitte des Polartags und am Südpol die Mitte der Polarnacht.
536 22. oder 23. September: Tagundnachtgleiche: Im Norden beginnt astronomisch der Herbst, im Süden der Frühling. Die Sonne ist erneut auf Höhe des Äquators.Abweichend davon wird in der Meteorologie der Beginn der Jahreszeiten jeweils auf den Monatsanfang vorverlegt (1. Dezember, 1. März usw.).
537 Der Energiehaushalt der Erde wird im Wesentlichen durch die Einstrahlung der Sonne und die Ausstrahlung der Erdoberfläche bzw. Atmosphäre bestimmt, also durch den Strahlungshaushalt der Erde. Die restlichen Beiträge von zusammen etwa 0,02 % liegen deutlich unterhalb der Messungsgenauigkeit der Solarkonstanten sowie ihrer Schwankung im Lauf eines Sonnenfleckenzyklus.
538 Etwa 0,013 % macht der durch radioaktive Zerfälle erzeugte geothermische Energiebeitrag aus, etwa 0,007 % stammen aus der menschlichen Nutzung fossiler und nuklearer Energieträger und etwa 0,002 % verursacht die Gezeitenreibung.
539 Die geometrische Albedo der Erde beträgt im Mittel 0,367, wobei ein wesentlicher Anteil auf die Wolken der Erdatmosphäre zurückzuführen ist. Dies führt zu einer globalen effektiven Temperatur von 246 K (-27 °C). Die Durchschnittstemperatur am Boden liegt jedoch durch einen starken atmosphärischen Treibhauseffekt bzw. Gegenstrahlung bei etwa 288 K (15 °C), wobei die Treibhausgase Wasser und Kohlendioxid den Hauptbeitrag liefern (siehe auch: Gleichgewichtstemperatur).
540 Die ersten Menschen lebten als Jäger und Sammler. Mit der Neolithischen Revolution begannen im Vorderen Orient (11.), in China (8.) und im mexikanischen Tiefland (6. Jahrtausend v. Chr.) Ackerbau und Viehzucht. Die Kulturpflanzen verdrängten die natürliche Pflanzenwelt. Im Zuge der Industrialisierung wurden weiträumige Landflächen in Industrie- und Verkehrsflächen umgewandelt.
541 Die Wechselwirkungen zwischen Lebewesen und Klima haben heute durch den zunehmenden Einfluss des Menschen eine neue Quantität erreicht. Während im Jahr 1920 circa 1,8 Milliarden Menschen die Erde bevölkerten, wuchs die Weltbevölkerung bis zum Jahr 2008 auf knapp 6,7 Milliarden an. In den Entwicklungsländern ist für die absehbare Zukunft weiterhin ein starkes Bevölkerungswachstum zu erwarten, während in vielen hoch entwickelten Ländern die Bevölkerung stagniert oder nur sehr langsam zunimmt, deren industrieller Einfluss auf die Natur aber weiterhin wächst. Im Februar 2005 prognostizierten Experten der Vereinten Nationen bis zum Jahr 2013 einen Anstieg auf 7 Milliarden, und auf 9,1 Milliarden bis 2050.
542 Seit 1990 ist der 22. April als Tag der Erde der internationale Aktionstag zum Schutz der Umwelt. Das Jahr 2008 wurde von den Vereinten Nationen unter Federführung der UNESCO zum Internationalen Jahr des Planeten Erde (IYPE) erklärt. Diese bislang größte weltweite Initiative in den Geowissenschaften soll die Bedeutung und den Nutzen der modernen Geowissenschaften für die Gesellschaft und für eine nachhaltige Entwicklung verdeutlichen. Zahlreiche Veranstaltungen und interdisziplinären Projekte auf internationaler und nationaler Ebene erstrecken sich von 2007 bis 2009 über einen Zeitraum von insgesamt drei Jahren.[3]
543 Die Erde wird von einem natürlichen Satelliten umkreist – dem Mond. Dieser ist im Vergleich zur Erde deutlich größer, als es bei den „Monden“ der anderen Planeten der Fall ist. Der große Satellit stabilisiert mit seiner relativ großen Masse und seinem gravitativen Einfluss auf den Äquatorwulst der Erde die Neigung der Erdachse gegen die Ekliptik und schafft durch die so von ihm bewirkte Zügelung der Jahreszeiten günstige Bedingungen für die Entwicklung des Lebens auf seinem Planeten. Ein mechanisches Gerät zur Demonstration der Umlaufbewegungen von Erde und Mond wird Tellurium genannt, nach Tellus, lateinisch für Erde.
544 Des Weiteren lenkt die Erde koorbitale Objekte wie den erdnahen Asteroiden Cruithne auf eine Hufeisenumlaufbahn entlang der Erdbahn. Von diesen koorbitalen Erdbahnkreuzern war der Asteroid 2003 YN107 in den Jahren von 1996 bis 2006 ein Quasisatellit der Erde und wird bei der übernächsten Begegnung im Jahr 2120 möglicherweise als wirklicher zweiter Mond von der Erde eingefangen werden. Der koorbitale Asteroid 2002 AA29 wechselt annähernd zyklisch zwischen einer Hufeisenumlaufbahn und einer Quasisatellitenbahn und wird das nächste Mal um das Jahr 2600 wieder für 45 Jahre ein Quasisatellit der Erde sein.
545 Die Erde ist bisher der einzige Planet, auf dem Lebensformen bzw. eine Biosphäre nachweisbar sind. Nach dem gegenwärtigen Stand der Forschung begann das Leben auf der Erde möglicherweise innerhalb eines relativ kurzen Zeitraums, gleich nach dem Ausklingen des letzten schweren Bombardements großer Asteroiden, dem die Erde nach ihrer Entstehung vor etwa 4,6 Milliarden Jahren bis etwa vor 3,9 Milliarden Jahren als letzte Phase der Bildung des Planetensystems ausgesetzt war. Nach dieser Zeit hat sich eine stabile Erdkruste ausgebildet und soweit abgekühlt, dass sich Wasser auf ihr sammeln konnte. Schon geologisch kurze Zeit später gibt es Hinweise auf die Entwicklung von Leben, die allerdings nicht von allen damit befassten Wissenschaftlern anerkannt werden.
546 In 3,85 Milliarden Jahre altem Sedimentgestein aus der Isua-Region im Südwesten Grönlands wurden in den Verhältnissen von Kohlenstoffisotopen Anomalien entdeckt, die auf biologischen Stoffwechsel hindeuten könnten; bei dem Gestein kann es sich aber auch statt um Sedimente lediglich um ein stark verändertes Ergussgestein ohne derartige Bedeutung handeln. Die ältesten direkten, allerdings umstrittenen Hinweise auf Leben, die als versteinerte Cyanobakterien gedeutet werden, sind 3,5 Milliarden Jahre alt und wurden in Gesteinen der Warrawoona-Gruppe im Nordwesten Australiens und im Barberton-Grünsteingürtel in Südafrika gefunden. Die ältesten und eindeutigen Lebensspuren auf der Erde sind 1,9 Milliarden Jahre alte fossile Bakterien aus der Gunflint-Formation in Ontario.
547 Die chemische wie die biologische Evolution sind untrennbar mit der Klimageschichte verknüpft. Das Leben wird in seiner Entwicklung von den herrschenden Bedingungen geprägt und hat seinerseits Einfluss auf die Entwicklung und das Erscheinungsbild der Erde.
548 Durch den Stoffwechsel des pflanzlichen Lebens, also durch die Photosynthese, wurde die Erdatmosphäre mit molekularem Sauerstoff angereichert und bekam ihren oxidierenden Charakter. Zudem wurde die Albedo und damit die Energiebilanz durch die Pflanzendecke merklich verändert.
549 Wie die Sonne und ihre anderen Planeten entstand die Erde vor etwa 4,6 Milliarden Jahren aus der Verdichtung des Sonnennebels. Man geht heute allgemein davon aus, dass sie während der ersten 100 Millionen Jahre einem intensiven Bombardement von Asteroiden ausgesetzt war. Heute ist nur noch ein geringer Beschuss zu verzeichnen. Die meisten der Meteore werden von Objekten hervorgerufen, die kleiner als 1 cm sind. Im Gegensatz zum Mond sind auf der Erde fast alle Einschlagkrater durch geologische Prozesse wieder ausgelöscht worden. Durch die kinetische Energie der Impakte während des schweren Bombardements und durch die Wärmeproduktion des radioaktiven Zerfalls erhitzte sich die junge Erde, bis sie größtenteils aufgeschmolzen war. In der Folge kam es zu einer gravitativen Differenzierung des Erdkörpers in einen Erdkern und einen Erdmantel. Die schwersten Elemente, vor allem Eisen, sanken in die Richtung des Schwerpunkts des Planeten, während leichte Elemente, vor allem Sauerstoff, Silizium und Aluminium, nach oben stiegen. Aus diesen Elementen bildeten sich hauptsächlich silikatische Minerale, aus denen auch die Gesteine der Erdkruste bestehen. Aufgrund ihres vorwiegenden Aufbaus aus Eisen und Silikaten hat die Erde wie alle terrestrischen Planeten eine recht hohe mittlere Dichte von 5,515 g/cm3.
550 Die Herkunft des Wassers auf der Erde, insbesondere die Frage, warum auf der Erde deutlich mehr Wasser vorkommt als auf den anderen erdähnlichen Planeten, ist bis heute nicht befriedigend geklärt. Ein Teil des Wassers dürfte durch das Ausgasen der Magma entstanden sein, also letztlich aus dem Erdinneren stammen. Ob dadurch aber die Menge an Wasser erklärt werden kann, ist fragwürdig. Weitere große Anteile könnten aber auch durch Einschläge von Kometen, transneptunischen Objekten oder wasserreichen Asteroiden (Protoplaneten) aus den äußeren Bereichen des Asteroidengürtels auf die Erde gekommen sein. Messungen des Isotopenverhältnisses von Deuterium zu Protium (D/H-Verhältnis) deuten dabei eher auf Asteroiden hin, da in Wassereinschlüssen in kohligen Chondriten ähnliche Verhältnisse gefunden wurden wie in ozeanischem Wasser, wohingegen bisherige Messungen dieses Isotopen-Verhältnisses an Kometen und transneptunischen Objekten nur schlecht mit irdischem Wasser übereinstimmten.
551 Maan kiertoaika Auringon ympäri on 365 vuorokautta, viisi tuntia, 48 minuuttia ja 46 sekuntia. Maan pyörähdysaika oman akselinsa ympäri on yksi tähtivuorokausi eli 23 tuntia 56 minuuttia ja 4,09053 sekuntia. Koska Maa ehtii jo yhden vuorokauden aikana kulkea jonkin matkaa pitkin kaarevaa rataa, kestää kuitenkin noin 4 minuuttia kauemmin, ennen kuin sama maapallon pituuspiiri on kääntyneenä kohti Aurinkoa, eli aurinkovuorokausi on tämän verran pitempi kuin tähtivuorokausi ja tunnin alkuperäisen määritelmän määritelmän mukaan tasan 24 tuntia. Maapallon pyörähdysaika saattaa muuttua hieman luonnonilmiöiden, asteroidi-iskujen yms. tapahtumien johdosta. Muutos on silti hyvin vähäistä. Esimerkiksi vuoden 2004 Intian valtameren maanjäristyksen vuoksi maapallon pyörähdysaika pieneni kolmella mikrosekunnilla.[1]
552 Maalla on yksi kiertolainen: Kuu. Se on emoplaneettaansa verrattuna suhteellisesti suurempi kuin yksikään toinen aurinkokunnan kuu.
553 Maan kiertorata Auringon ympäri ei ole täysin ympyrämäinen, vaan tarkkaan ottaen ellipsi, jonka toisessa polttopisteessä on Aurinko tai oikeastaan aurinkokunnan massakeskipiste. Maa on lähinnä Aurinkoa, kun pohjoisella pallonpuoliskolla on talvi, ja vastaavasti kauimpana, kun pohjoisella pallonpuoliskolla on kesä. Vuodenaikojen vaihtelu johtuu akselikallistumasta, eli siitä, että maan akseli on 23,44 astetta kallellaan ratatason normaaliin nähden. Maan akseli on sen napojen kautta kulkevaksi kuviteltu suora. Tällä hetkellä akseli osoittaa lähelle Pohjantähteä. Auringon ja Kuun vaikutuksesta akseli kuitenkin kiertyy hitaasti, ja esimerkiksi 12 000 vuoden kuluttua pohjoinen taivaannapa sijaitsee Vegan lähistöllä. Ilmiötä kutsutaan prekessioksi. Täyteen prekessiokierrokseen kuluu 25 725 vuotta.
554 Maapallo on maailmankaikkeuden ainoa alue, jolla tiedetään olevan elämää. Maalla elää noin puoli miljoonaa kasvilajia ja noin 1,5 miljoonaa eläinlajia. Eläinlajeista yli miljoona lajia on hyönteisiä ja alle 50 000 lajia selkärankaisia. Ihmisiä maapallolla elää noin 6,7 miljardia henkeä, ks. tarkemmin väkiluku.
555 Maapallo syntyi samoihin aikoihin muiden planeettojen ja Auringon kanssa. Maapallon arvellaan syntyneen noin 4,6 miljardia vuotta sitten, jolloin läheinen tähti räjähti. Räjähdyksen jälkeen kaasu ja pöly alkoi tiivistyä nykyisen aurinkokunnan kohdalla, keskelle tiivistyi eniten ainetta ja muualle hieman vähemmän. Keskelle syntyi Aurinko.
556 Maa oli aiemmin asteroidipommituksen kohteena, eli asteroideja törmäsi maapallolle hyvin paljon. Asteroidit toivat maapallolle lämpöä ja energiaa ja nostivat Maan lämpötilaa. Asteroiditörmäykset kuitenkin lakkasivat, jolloin Maan lämpötila alkoi laskea ja Maan pinta alkoi kerrostua ja jähmettyä, raskaimmat alkuaineet painuivat pohjalle ja keveimmät aineet nousivat pinnalle. Maahan syntyi näin litosfääri.
557 Maan aktiivinen tulivuoritoiminta vapautti runsaasti kaasuja, suurimmaksi osaksi kuitenkin hiilidioksidia ja vesihöyryä. Maalle syntyi kaasukehä, jonka Maa pystyi pitämään itsellään vetovoiman ansiosta. Kaasukehän ansiosta Maan lämpötilat alkoivat tasaantua. Kaasukehä sisälsi myös typpeä, vetyä, ammoniakkia ja metaania.
558 Maapallon hydrosfäärin synnystä ei ole yksimielisyyttä. Maapallon veden arvellaan olevan peräisin komeetoista. Maapallon alkuaikoina olisi Maahan törmännyt suuri komeetta, joka sisälsi runsaasti vesijäätä. Jää kaasuuntui suoraan kiinteästä olomuodosta eli sublimoitui, minkä jälkeen se vähitellen tiivistyi vedeksi ja satoi Maahan. Maapallon hydrosfäärin synnystä ei kuitenkaan olla aivan yksimielisiä.
559 Noin 3 miljardia vuotta sitten meriin syntyi alkeellista elämää, ja jotkin eliöt olivat yhteyttämiskykyisiä. Meri oli otollinen elämän muodostumiselle, sillä Auringon ultraviolettisäteily ei päässyt sinne. Eliöt tuottivat sivutuotteenaan happea, joka mahdollisti kehittyneemmän elämän syntymisen mm. maanpinnalle. Salamoinnin vaikutuksesta Maahan syntyi otsonia, joka muodosti välttämättömän otsonikerroksen. Maalle syntyi atmosfääri, mutta sen hapen pitoisuus on vaihdellut historian saatossa 10 % ja 30 % välillä.
560 Maa on ainoa aurinkokunnan planeetta, jonka pinnalla on nestemäistä vettä; se peittää noin 71 % koko pallon pinnasta. Tästä se onkin saanut kutsumanimen "sininen planeetta". Maapallon kuivan maan pinta-ala onkin lähes täsmälleen sama kuin puolet pienemmän Marsin koko ala.
561 Maan ilmakehä koostuu pääasiassa typestä (78 %) ja hapesta (21 %). Ihmiselämän kannalta tärkeää on, että hiilidioksidia ilmassa on alle prosentti. Planeetan ja ilmakehän paksuuksien suhde on samaa luokkaa kuin omenan ja sen kuoren. Pinnalta katsottuna ilmakehän näkyvin ominaisuus on sen sinisyys, joka syntyy, kun valo siroaa kaasumolekyyleistä (Rayleigh-sironta). Valon spektrin sinisen pään aallonpituudet siroavat eniten. Ilman sirontaa taivas näyttäisi mustalta. Samasta ilmiöstä johtuen Aurinko näyttää keltaiselta tai punaiselta riippuen valon ilmakehässä kulkeman matkan pituudesta. Ilmakehä päästää lävitseen vain osan Auringon säteilystä, ja esimerkiksi haitallinen ultraviolettisäteily kilpistyy suurelta osin monen kymmenen kilometrin korkeudella sijaitsevaan otsonikerrokseen.
562 Maa on tällä hetkellä ainoa planeetta maailmankaikkeudessa, jolla varmasti tiedetään olevan elämää. Tämänkaltaisen elämän esiintymisen mahdollistavat mm. nestemäinen vesi ja Auringon jatkuva valoenergiavirta. Ilmakehässä oleva suurehko happimäärä sen sijaan on Maan kasviston aikaansaama ja on taas eläinten, myös ihmisten, elinehto.
563 Merissä tapahtuvalla termohaliinikierrolla ja sen häiriöillä on oma osansa jääkausien synnyssä, vaikka niiden pääsyy onkin mannerliikunnat ja maan akselikallistuman vaihtelut.
564 Maan ilmasto vaihtelee huomattavasti eri paikoissa, ja niin syntyneet ilmastovyöhykkeet luovat osaltaan erilaisia biomeja, kasvillisuusvyöhykkeitä. Aurinko ylläpitää Ilmakehän kiertoliikettä, joka puolestaan pyrkii fysiikan lakien mukaisesti tasoittamaan lämpöeroja tropiikin ja napa-alueiden välillä. Suomen säähän vaikuttavat polaaririntaman syklonit (matalapaineet) ovat suuren luokan lämpöpumppuja, jotka kuljettavat pohjoiseen lauhaa ilmaa ja vetävät perässään kylmän arktisen ilman etelään.
565 Maan kiinteä kuorikerros koostuu paristakymmenestä mannerlaatasta, jotka kelluvat vaippaa raskaamman kiviaineksen päällä. Laatat liikkuvat alituisesti toistensa suhteen, aiheuttaen maanjäristyksiä ja tulivuoritoimintaa, lähinnä laattojen reunoilla, jossa ne törmäävät tai työntyvät toisensa alle. Toisaalta uutta laattamateriaalia eli merenpohjaa muodostuu valtamerten keskellä, kuten Islannissa, jossa kiviainesta työntyy esiin Maan vaipasta. Laattaliikkeen energianlähde on radioaktiivinen hajoaminen.
566 Maan sisäinen koostumus on meille elintärkeä. Planeetalla on nimittäin jatkuvan radioaktiivisen hajoamisen ansiosta sula rauta-nikkeli-ydin, joka saa aikaan voimakkaan magneettikentän, mikä suojaa elämää vaaralliselta säteilyltä sekä Auringosta tulevalta suurienergiseltä hiukkaspommitukselta. Lähellä napa-alueita hiukkaspommitus voidaan nähdä paljain silmin öiseen aikaan värikkäinä revontulina. Magneettikentän vangitsemat Auringosta tulevat hiukkaset koostavat van Allenin vyöhykkeet.
567 Maan magneettikenttä, jonka voimakkuus on 0,000025–0,00005 teslaa, heikkenee aika ajoin ja vaihtaa napaisuuttaan. Sama napaisuus kestää yleensä satojatuhansia vuosia.
568 Maa voidaan jakaa kerroksiin, pinnalta keskipisteeseen, koostumuksen perusteella (kemiallinen jako) ja mekaanisten ominaisuuksien (aineen olomuoto, mekaaninen toiminta) mukaan.
569 Porauksilla on päästy kymmenen kilometrin syvyyteen maankuoren sisälle, mutta Maan vaippa kuoren alla on yhä koskematon. Epäsuoraa tietoa Maan sisäosista saadaan tutkimalla maanjäristysten ja ydinräjäytysten yhteydessä syntyviä seismisiä aaltoja. Uusimpina keinoina ovat nousseet esiin maan sisällä olevien uraanin, toriumin ja kalium-40:n radioaktiivisessa hajoamisessa syntyvien neutriinojen havaitseminen ja keinotekoisella neutriinosuihkulla luotaaminen.
570 Maapallon radan soikeus ja muut rata-arvot vaihtelevat jonkin verran kymmenien tuhansien vuosien kuluessa. Muutokset johtuvat muiden aurinkokunnan planeettojen heikoista vetovoimavaikutuksesta. Maapallon akseli tekee 25 725 vuoden jaksossa vaappuvan hyrrän tapaista prekessioliikettä. Se kuten nutaatio ovat etupäässä muiden taivaankappaleiden aiheuttamia häiriöitä. Lisäksi pohjoisnapa siirtyy lyhyemmällä, parinkymmenen vuoden luokkaa olevalla jaksolla epäsäännöllisesti muutaman kymmenen metrin levyisessä neliössä. Ilmiötä kutsutaan napavariaatioksi. Maapallon pyöriminen hidastuu taivaankappaleiden vetovoiman takia 0,005 sekuntia vuodessa. Korallitutkimusten mukaan 370 miljoonaa vuotta sitten Maan pyörähdysaika oli 22,7 tuntia. Noin 600 miljoonaa vuotta sitten kambrikauden lähestyessä alkuaan Maan vuorokausi oli 21h, ja vuodessa siis 423 vuorokautta. Eräs arvio väittää Maan pyörähtäneen synnyttyään noin 4 600 miljoonaa vuotta sitten kierroksen kuudessa tunnissa, toinen 14 tunnissa.lähde?
571 Maailmankartta on kartta maapallon pinnasta. Maasta on kuitenkin mahdotonta saada täysin todellista karttaa tasaiselle pinnalle. Ainoa oikea kartta on karttapallossa. Maapallosta on olemassa erilaisia karttaprojektioita. Esimerkiksi Petersin sovelletussa projektiossa alueiden ja valtioiden pinta-alat ovat oikeat toisiinsa verrattuna, mutta muodot ovat vääristyneet. Mercatorin oikeakulmaisessa karttaprojektiossa muodot ovat oikeat, mutta päiväntasaajalla sijaitsevat valtiot ovat liian pieniä ja pohjoisessa ja etelässä sijaitsevat liian suuria. Yhdistämällä erilaisia projektioita virheitä saadaan pienennettyä.
572 Aurinko (symboli ☉) on Maata lähin tähti. Auringon ympärille syntyneet planeetat ja muut kappaleet muodostavat aurinkokunnan. Aurinko on tyypillinen tähti, jolla ei ilmeisesti ole mitään poikkeuksellisia ominaisuuksia.[1] Auringon perinteisiä suomalaisia nimiä ovat myös Päivä, Päivyt ja Päivänkehrä.[2] Suurella alkukirjaimella kirjoitettaessa Aurinko on erisnimi omalle tähdellemme lähinnä tähtitieteessä, mutta pienellä kirjoitetaan aurinko jokapäiväisessä kielenkäytössä.
573 Aurinko syntyi noin 5 miljardia vuotta sitten, ja noin 5 miljardin vuoden kuluttua sen energiavarat loppuvat.[3] Energian tuoton lämpötila kasvaa, johtuen helposti fuusioituvan vedyn vähenemisestä. Aurinko alkaa nyt tuottaa yhä enemmän (kokoon luhistumista estävää) energiaa hiili jne fuusioilla. Korkeammalla lämpötilalla tapahtuva nopea energian tuotanto aiheuttaa ongelmia: lämpö ei ehdi siirtyä vakaasti ytimestä ulos ulkoavaruuteen (vrt. lämmön siirtymisen hitaus). Tämän seurauksena Auringon koko kasvaa (varastoi energiaa). Säteily tietenkin lisääntyy ja aikaansaa ennen pitkää maapallon lämpenemistä, tosin hitaasti. 900 miljoonan vuoden kuluttua Auringon ollessa 5,5 miljardin vuoden ikäinen arvioidaan maanpinnan keskilämpötilan ylittävän Maan nykymuotoiselle elämälle kriittisen 30 °C rajan. Miljardin vuoden kuluttua tästä, siis 1,9 miljardia vuotta nykyhetkestä, maapallon meret kuivuvat keskilämpötilan ylittäessä 100 °C. Viimeistään tällöin Maa muuttuu elinkelvottomaksi ainakin nykyisenkaltaisille elämänmuodoille. Viiden miljardin vuoden kuluttua vety loppuu Auringon keskustasta ja se alkaa hitaasti laajentua ja muuttua punaiseksi. Vähitellen Auringosta tulee punainen jättiläinen, joka nielaisee sisemmät planeetat Merkuriuksen ja Venuksen. Maapallo sulaa laavapalloksi, ja osa sen kivikehästä höyrystyy avaruuteen. Samalla Aurinko puhaltaa uloimmat kerroksensa planetaariseksi sumuksi, jolloin keskustassa oleva tiivis ydin paljastuu ja muuttuu myöhemmin valkoiseksi kääpiöksi. Jäljelle jäänyt Auringon ydin jäähtyy lopulta valkoisesta kääpiöstä mustaksi kääpiöksi.[4] Vielä silloinkin Aurinkoa kiertäneet planeetat, mukaan lukien maapallon jo tässä vaiheessa jäähtynyt ydin, kiertävät sitä ikuisessa pimeydessä ja kylmyydessä.
574 Aurinkoa on pidetty aikaisemmin pienenä ja suhteellisen mitättömänä tähtenä. Nykyään tiedetään Auringon olevan kirkkaampi kuin 85 % Linnunradan tähdistä, toisaalta suurin osa tähdistä on himmeitä punaisia kääpiöitä. Aurinko ei enää näy paljain silmin suunnilleen 50 valovuoden etäisyydellä.
575 Auringon pinta muuttuu koko ajan. Sen pinnan ilmiöistä tunnetuin on auringonpilkut. Muita pinnalla tapahtuvia ilmiöitä ovat flaret eli roihut, protuberanssit, granulat ja niin kutsutut auringonjäristykset, joita muun muassa ESA:n SOHO -avaruusluotain havaitsi. Aurinko myös virittää Maan lähiavaruuteen niin kutsutun avaruussään. Auringon aktiivisuuden huippukausina esiintyy niin kutsuttuja aurinkomyrskyjä, jotka näkyvät Maassa muun muassa voimakkaina ja laaja-alaisina revontulina ja esimerkiksi Kanadan ja Yhdysvaltain itärannikon pitkien sähkön siirtolinjojen jakeluhäiriöinä.[5] Auringon on raportoitu olleen vuonna 2009 himmeimmillään noin sadan vuoden aikana. [6]
576 Aurinko saa säteilemänsä energian siten, että vety muuttuu heliumiksi Auringon ytimessä tapahtuvassa lämpöydinreaktiossa. Ytimessä noin 700 miljoonaa tonnia vetyä fuusioituu 695 miljoonaksi tonniksi heliumia joka sekunti. Erityisen suhteellisuusteorian mukaisesti sekunnissa vapautuu noin 5 miljoonaa tonnia energiaa neljän vety-ytimen "pudotessa" helium-ytimeksi, jota vahva ydinvoima pitää koossa.
577 Tämä energia siirtyy, ensin gamma- ja edelleen röntgensäteilyn kautta ja lopuksi konvektiovirtauksena (lämpösiirtymisenä) Auringon pinnalle. Ydinreaktiosta (Auringon ytimessä) siihen, kun tämä energia irtoaa valona Auringon pinnalta, kuluu noin miljoona vuotta.
578 Säteilyvyöhykkeessä ei tapahdu enää ydinreaktioita ja ytimestä tuleva energia siirtyy pinnalle absorboitumalla ja emittoitumalla nousten säteilyvyöhykkeen pintaa kohden, joka on noin 0,8 Auringon säteen kohdalla. Energian siirtyminen on hidasta ja ytimestä pintaan siirtyminen voi kestää kymmeniä miljoonia vuosia.
579 Konvektiovyöhykkeessä energia siirtyy pääosin aineen virtauksen mukana pinnalle. Vyöhykkeen aine virtaa kohti Auringon pintaa. Pinnalla aine jäähtyy ja vajoaa takaisin kohti Auringon ydintä. Virtaukset voi havainnoida jo pienellä kaukoputkella pinnan rakeisuutena eli granuloina (huomioi kuitenkin aiheeseen liittyvät turvallisuusohjeet).
580 Fotosfäärissä Auringon aine muuttuu läpinäkyväksi ja se säteilee valon nopeudella kaikilla aallonpituuksilla, etenkin näkyvässä valossa. Fotosfäärin keskimääräinen lämpötila on 5785 K. Siinä esiintyy Auringon magneettikentästä johtuvia auringonpilkkuja, joiden kohdalla lämpötila on huomattavasti alhaisempi.
581 Aurinkoa voidaan havaita kaukoputkella heijastamalla sen kuva kaukoputken taakse tai käyttämällä himmentävää suodatinta, joka on objektiivin edessä. Aurinkoa ei saa koskaan katsoa suoraan kiikarin tai kaukoputken läpi ilman aurinkosuodatinta, sillä se vahingoittaa näkökykyä. Jopa auringonpimennyksen yhteydessä auringon suora katsominen voi helposti vahingoittaa silmiä. Aurinkoa ei kannata katsoa myöskään aurinkolasien tai sellaisen tummentavan suojan läpi, jota ei ole tarkoitettu Auringon katsomiseen. Auringonpimennystä katsottaessa tulee käyttää tähän tarkoitettua himmennintä tai hitsaajan suojalaseja.
582 Auringon voimakkaalle UV-säteilylle pitkäaikaisesti altistunut iho palaa, mikä lisää riskiä sairastua ihosyöpään. Palamisalttiutta kuvaamaan on kehitetty UV-indeksi. Myös ihon palamisherkkyys vaihtelee eri henkilöillä. Vaaleilla henkilöillä ihoa suojaavan pigmentin muodostuminen on heikompaa, jolloin on käytettävä korkeamman suojakertoimen omaavia aurinkovoiteita tai valoa läpäisemätöntä suojavaatetusta.
583 Aurinko on maapallon merkittävin energianlähde, joka kasveissa tapahtuvan yhteyttämisen kautta tuottaa melkein kaiken eliökunnan kuluttamasta energiasta. Myös ihmisten fyysinen käyttövoima on Auringosta lähtöisin, sillä kaikki ravinto alkaen kasvikunnasta päättyen ravintoketjun ylimpiin lenkkeihin edustaa varastoitunutta aurinkoenergiaa. Ydinvoimaa lukuun ottamatta kaikki ihmiskunnan kuluttama energia on peräisin Auringon fuusioreaktioista eri väylien kautta.
584 Aurinko on näyttävä ilmiö kaikkialla maapallolla ja se hallitsee mm. vuorokaudenaikojen vaihteluja. Siksi Auringolla on merkittävä asema eri kulttuureissa ja sitä palvotaan ja on palvottu jumalana muun muassa muinaisessa Egyptissä, Kreikassa, Roomassa, Etelä-Amerikassa sekä Japanissa.
585 Planeetta on suurimassainen tähteä kiertävä kappale, joka on painovoiman vaikutuksen vuoksi lähes pallomainen, joskin pyörimisliike akselin ympäri aiheuttaa jonkin verran litistymistä. Koska kappaleen massa vaikuttaa suoraan sen keskustassa vallitsevaan paineeseen ja lämpötilaan, massan ollessa tarpeeksi suuri ja kemiallisen koostumuksen ollessa sopiva, "planeetan" sisällä käynnistyy ydinfuusio. Tällöin kappaletta kutsutaan tähdeksi. Planeetat heijastavat tähden valoa. Tähti ja sitä kiertävät planeetat sekä muut pienemmät kappaleet muodostavat aurinkokunnan.
586 Kysymys siitä, milloin jokin taivaankappale on planeetta on jossakin määrin sopimuksenvarainen, eikä mitään yksikäsitteistä rajaa suuren asteroidin ja pienen planeetan tai toisaalta pienen ruskeaksi kääpiöksi jääneen tähden ja jättiläisplaneetan välillä ole. Tämä epätarkkuus johtuu planeetan määritelmän historiallisesta alkuperästä: muinoin taivaankappaleet jaettiin liikkumattomiin kiintotähtiin ja liikkuviin planeettoihin. Nykyisellä havaintotekniikalla tämä jako ei kuitenkaan enää ole riittävä sillä toisaalta tähtien liikkeitä pystytään mittaamaan ja toisaalta tunnetaan paljon pienkappaleita, joiden kutsuminen planeetoiksi ei ole mielekästä. "Planeetan uusi määritelmä rajaa niiden määrän tiukasti kahdeksaan. Tämä rajaus voi säilyä oppikirjoissa ja kartoissa hyvinkin jopa satoja vuosia tästä eteenpäin. Rajauksessa on kolme ehtoa ja se on hyvin tarkka. Planeetta on nyt kappale, joka kiertää Aurinkoa. Sen massa on tarpeeksi suuri niin, että kappale on pyöreä. Tärkein rajaus on se, että planeetta hallitsee omaa kiertorataansa. Tätä määritelmää Pluto ei täyttänyt. Taivaankappale kulkee noin 20 vuotta kiertoajastaan Neptunuksen radan sisäpuolella. Tällöin Neptunus on sen alueella kiertoradan hallitseva osapuoli." (HS 25.8.2006)
587 Jättiläisplaneetat (esimerkiksi Jupiter) koostuvat kaasuista ja nesteestä. Kaasukehän suunnaton paine aiheuttaa kaasujen muuttumisen nesteeksi syvemmällä ilmakehässä ja paksun nestekerroksen alla on pieni kiinteä ydin. Jättiläisplaneetat ovat varsin massiivisia.
588 Maankaltaiset planeetat (esimerkiksi Maa) koostuvat lähinnä piioksidin ja metallien muodostamista yhdisteistä. Ne ovat melko pienimassaisia jättiläisplaneettoihin verrattuna. Kiviplaneetalla voi olla sula ydin.
589 Planeettakunnat syntyvät tähdeksi supistuvan tähtienvälisen kaasu- ja pölypiilven siitä osasta, joka ei ehdi romahtaa tähdeksi, vaan jää keskipakoisvoiman takia kiertämään syntynyttä alkutähteä, prototähteä. Syntyvää tähteä kiekkona kiertävä kaasu tiivistyy joiltain osin hiukkasiksi, joista syntyvät ajan kuluessa planeetat. Hiukkasten keskinäiset törmäilyt litistävät alussa paksua kiekkoa. Kiekkoon putoaa kaasua jäljelle jääneestä pilvestä, ja sen aine putoaa hitaasti spiraalimaista rataa pitkin kohti syntyvää keskustähteä. Kaasukiekosta tiivistyy lähellä tähteä kivensiruja ja kauempana jääkimpaleita. Nämä törmäilevät toisiinsa ja syntyy planeettoja. Kaasuplaneetat kuten Jupiter syntyvät siten, että riittävän suureksi kasvanut jää- ja kivipallo alkaa kerätä ympäristöstä kevyttä vetykaasua. Maan kokoinen kappale on vetovoimaltaan liian pieni keräämään ympärilleen suurta vetykehää. Näin selittyy maankaltaisten ja jättiläisplaneettojen ero. Asteroidit ja komeetat ovat planeettojen syntyprosessissa jäljelle jäänyttä jätettä. Aurinkokunnan ja muiden planeettakuntien synnyssä on yhä monia tutkijoita mietityttäviä kohtia. Kuumat jupiterit eli spetroskoopilla havaitut joidenkin lähitähtien seuralaiset ovat syntyneet planeettojen vaellettua lähelle keskustähteään valtavassa kaasukiekossa.
590 Tähdet ja planeetat syntyvät tiivistymällä tähtienvälisestä aineesta, jota on kaasu ja pöly. Jotta synty lähtisi käyntiin, tähtienvälisen aineen on oltava riittävän tiheää. Linnunradassa on monia molekyylipilviä, joiden lämpötila on alhainen ja joissa olevat tiheät ytimet saattavat alkaa kutistua tähdiksi. Laukaisevana tekijänä voi olla esimerkiksi aikaisemmin syntyneen tähden räjähtäminen. Räjähdys tuottaa tiheää pilveä kokoon puristavan paineaallon. Molekyylipilven osa alkaa kutistua, kun sen sisäinen paine on pienempi kuin pilven oma painovoima. Sisäinen paine aiheutuu muun muassa magneettikentistä, pyörimisestä ja kaasun osasten lämpöliikkeestä. Kun pilvi kutistuu, sen tiheä ydin kutistuu hyvin nopeasti kuumentuen. Kuumeneminen johtuu kaasun putoamisesta ja pyörimisestä sekä pyörteilystä aiheutuvasta kitkasta. Pilven pyörimisliike kiihtyy, kun se kutistuu. Keskipakoisvoima pitää pilven päiväntasaajan suunnassa olevaa osaa kaukana keskustähdestä, napojen suunnassa kutistuminen on nopeaa. Näin ytimen ympärillä oleva kaasu litistyy kiekoksi. Kiekkoa ohentavat entisestään kiekon osasten sisäiset törmäykset. Tiheä keskus kuumenee kutistuessaan jatkuvasti, ensin kaasumolekyylit hajoavat ja lopuksi ionisoituvat. Kuuma ionisoitunut kaasu säteilee ympäristöön ensin infrapunasäteilyä, lopulta näkyvää valoa. Kun vastasyntynyt tähti alkaa vuorovaikuttaa ympäröivän kaasukiekon kanssa, se synnyttää valtavia suihkuja, jotka sinkoutuvat valovuosien päähän tähden ja kiekon väliltä napojen suunnassa. Samaan aikaan kaasukiekossa alkaa tapahtua pölyhiukkasten tiivistymistä. Pölyhiukkaset törmäilevät toisiinsa ja sopivissa tapauksissa syntyneet törmäykset tuottavat suurempia hiukkasia. Toiset törmäykset ovat hajottavia. Liian suurella nopeudella tapahtunut törmäys on hajottava. Lopulta kuitenkin rakentavat törmäykset voittavat ja aikaa myöten syntyy kilometrien kokoisia planetesimaaleja, jotka kasvavat suuriksi esiplaneetoiksi, oligarkeiksi, joita on noin sata ja joiden ratojen kehitys ja törmäily ovat hidasta. Oligarkkien radat muuttuivat miljoonien vuosien kuluessa keskinäisten vetovoimien takia. Eniten aikaa vievä vaihe on oligarkkien törmäily esimerkiksi kymmeneksi planeetaksi. Esimerkiksi oligarkkien muodostama alkuaurinkokunta oli tasapainoton, kaoottinen, ja altis suurille törmäyksille. Esimerkiksi Maa ja Kuu ovat syntyneet kahden oligarkin törmäyksen tuloksena. Maahan törmännyt Marsin kokoinen oligarkki sinkosi alkumaasta ainetta niin paljon, että siitä saattoi syntyä Kuu. Jättiläisplaneetat syntyvät melko kaukana auringosta vyöhykkeellä, missä vesihöyry tiivistyy jäähileiksi. Jäähileet pöly kasautuvat aikaa myöten valtaviksi noin kymmenen Maan massan planeetoiksi, jotka saattavat kerätä vetyä ja heliumia kaasukiekosta, mihin Maan kokoinen pieni planeetta ei kykene. Jättiläisplaneetat myös vaeltelevat jonkin verran tähteä ympäröivässä kiekossa muun muassa planeetan ja kaasun välisten vuorovesivoimien, planeetan ja planetesimaalien välisten vuorovaikutusten ja keskinäisten vetovoimien takia. Oortin komeettapilven tapainen muodostelma syntyy, kun jättiläisplaneetat sinkoavat läheltä ohittavia planetesimaaleja kaukaisille radoille painovoimallaan. Pluton kaltaiset Kuiperin vyöhykkeen kääpiöplaneetat ovat tiivistymättömän planeetan osasia.
591 Useiden tutkijoiden nykyään kannattaman planeettakunnan syntyteorian, kasautumisteorian ongelma on ollut planeettojen syntynopeus: Se on laskujen mukaan liian hidas varsinkin aivan aurinkokunnan ulkolaidoilla, esimerkiksi Uranuksen ja Neptunuksen etäisyydellä. Tätä puutetta koetetaan selittää migraatioteorialla, jonka mukaan planeetat vaeltelevat huomattavastikin kaasukiekossa synnyttyään. Vaeltelu riippuu muun muassa kaasukiekon tiheydestä ja planeetojen syntyvauhdista. Näin pystytään selittämään monenlaisten planeettakuntien synty. Kilpailevan kiekkoepävakaisuusteorian mukaan Aurinkoa ympäröivässä kaasukiekossa olisi syntynyt tiivistymiä, jotka olisivat romahtaneet oman painovoimansa takia kasaan. Tämän teorian ongelma on, että se saattaa vaatia kiekolta suurempia tiheyksiä kuin Aurinkoa ympäröivässä kaasukiekossa oli.
592 On yritetty monenlaisin teorioin selittää planeettakuntien syntyä. Mikään tutkijoiden kehittämistä planeettakuntien syntyteorioista ei ole täydellinen. On vaikeaa laatia teoria, joka selittää fysiikan lakien avulla planeettojen etäisyydet ja muut ominaisuudet täsmällisesti. Ei osata sanoa, minkälaisten tähtien ympärille planeettoja voi syntyä. Nykyään useimmat tutkijat ovat sitä mieltä, että varsin monenlaisten, jos tähden elinikä riittää.
593 Aurinkokunnassa on sekä lähellä aurinkoa olevia kiviplaneettoja, kaukana Auringosta sijaitsevia runsaasti kaasua sisältäviä jättiläisplaneettoja sekä jäisiä kappaleita. Kiviplaneetat ovat kahden AU:n sisällä auringosta ja koostuvat metalleista ja silikaateista, kun taas jättiläisplaneetat sijaitsevat ulompana ja koostuvat jäästä ja kevyemmistä aineista aina vetyyn ja heliumiin asti. Aurinkokunnan ulko-osissa on myös jäästä ja kivestä koostuvia kuita ja pikkuplaneettoja.
594 Lähes jokaisella planeetalla on kuiksi kutsuttuja kiertolaisia. Lähes kaikki kuut kiertävät planeettojaan samaan suuntaan ja samassa tasossa kuin planeetat kiertävät aurinkoa. Erityisesti Jupiterin kiertolaiset ovat kuin planeettakunnan pienoismalli, sillä niiden tiheys on sitä suurempi mitä lähempänä Jupiteria ne kiertävät. Mutta Maa ja Kuu ovat kuin planeettapari, sillä Kuu on halkaisijaltaan noin neljäsosa Maasta, massaltaankin runsas sadasosa.
595 Tähän asti on havaittu yli sata aurinkokunnan ulkopuolista planeettajärjestelmää eli eksoplaneettakuntaa. Ne ovat hyvin erilaisia kuin omamme. Niihin sisältyy kummalliselta näyttäviä järjestelmiä, joissa jättiläisplaneetta tai -planeetat kiertävät keskustähteään keskimäärin lähempänä kuin Merkurius aurinkoa. On myös havaittu hyvin soikeilla radoilla kiertäviä planeettoja, jollaisia aurinkokunnassamme ei ole. Niiden radan eksentrisyys on jopa yli 0,8, aurinkokunnan planeettojen eksentrisyys tyypillisesti on alle 0,1.
596 On olemassa myös järjestelmiä, joissa Jupiterin massainen planeetta kiertää tähteään etäisyydellä, jolla lämpötila sallii veden esiintymisen nestemäisessä muodossa, eli Maata vastaavalla etäisyydellä keskustähdestään. Lisäksi löydettyjen planeettakuntien joukossa on järjestelmiä, joissa kolme tai jopa neljä suurta planeettaa kiertää tähteään alle 5 AU:n etäisyydeltä keskustähdestään. Aurinkoa lähimmän planeetan, Jupiterin, etäisyys keskustähdestään on 5,2 AU ja Aurinkokunnan muut jättiläisplaneetat ovat vielä kauemapana. Nämä spektroskoopilla löydetyt oudot planeettakunnat ovat todellinen haaste aurinkokunan syntyteorioiden laatijoile.
597 Tähtienvälinen avaruus ei ole tyhjää, vaan täynnä kaasua, molekyylejä ja pölyhiukkasia ali tähtienvälistä ainetta. Suurin osa tähtienvälisestä aineesta on vetyä ja heliumia, joukossa on muita alkuaineita ja näiden yhdisteitä, jotka voivat olla pölynä. Linnunradan tyyppisen kierteisgalaksin massasta noin 10% on tähtienvälistä ainetta. Aine ei ole myöskään tasaisesti jakautunut vaan se muodostaa toisaalle pilviä ja tiivistymiä, toisaalla taas ainetta on äärimmäisen harvassa. Tähtienvälisen aineen tihentymät muodostavat tavallisesti kuitumaisia filamentteja ja verkkomaisia rakenteita, mikä kertoo aineen turbulenttisesta, pyörteisestä käyttäytymisestä. Turbulenssia aiheuttavat pääasiassa tähtien hiukkastuulet ja supernovien shokkiaallot. Kaasun tiivistymiä kutsutaan molekulaarisiksi pilviksi, sillä niistä on havaittu monia orgaanisia ja epäorgaanisia molekyylejä (esim. CO, CN, CS, SiO, OH, H2O, HCN, SO2, H2S, H2SO ja lukuisia muita vedyn, hiilen typen ja hapen yhdisteitä). Mutkikkaitten molekyylien, mahdollisesti jopa aminohappojen, muodostuminen on mahdollista, sillä nuorten lähitähtien voimakas UV-säteily ei pääse tunkeutumaan pilvien ytimiin asti ja alkuaineet voivat rauhassa muodostaa yhdisteitä.
598 Tähtienvälisen aiheen ominaisuuksia voi laskea mutkikkailla matemaattisilla yhtälöillä, jotka pohjautuvat fysiikan lakeihin. Tähtienvälisen aineen käyttäytymistä kuvataan tavallisesti fysiikan nestedynamiikan ja magnetohydrodynamiikan yhtälöillä. Tavallisesti yhtälöissä otetaan huomioon magneettikenttien vaikutus, lähitähtien säteilyn ja kosmisten säteiden vaikutukset ja supernovien shokkiaaltojen satunnainen esiintyminen.
599 Molekulaaristen pilvien koot ja massat voivat olla hyvin erilaisia. Tähtien syntyalueilla, Linnunradan spiraalihaaroissa, pilvikompleksit voivat olla suurimmillaan massaltaan 106 Auringon massaa ja halkaisijaltaan 100 pc. Pienimmillään ne voivat olla massaltaan alle 10 Auringon massaa ja halkaisijaltaan alle parsekin. Molekyylejä sisältävien pilvien ämpötilat ovat tyypillisesti välillä 10-100 kelviniä.
600 Molekulaariset pilvet muodostuvat pääosin tähtienvälisen aineen saapuessa linnunradan spiraalihaaroihin ja sitten tiivistyessä tai supernovien shokkiaaltojen vaikutuksesta. Muodostumiseen kuluva aika voi olla suuruudeltaan 10-20 miljoonaa vuotta, joten pilvien muodostuminen on yleistä Linnunradan mittakaavassa, jonka ikä on miljardeja vuosia. Koska pilviä havaitaan runsaasti tähtienvälisessä avaruudessa, niiden on pysyttävä stabiilissa tilassa kohtuullisen pitkiä aikoja. Jotta molekulaariset pilvet pysyisivät koossa eivätkä romahtaisi oman gravitaationsa vaikutuksesta kasaan, niissä täytyy esiintyä päinvastaisella tavalla vaikuttavia voimia. Tällaisina voimina toimivat tavallinen kaasun hiukkasten lämpöliikkeestä aiheutuva paine, magneettikentistä aiheutuvat voimat ja kaasun turbulenssien aiheuttama paine, joista magneettikentän ja turbulenssien vaikutukset ovat tavallisesti hallitsevassa asemassa koko pilven mittakaavassa. Kaasun lämpöliikkeestä aiheutuva paine puolestaan tuottaa tavallisesti suurimman gravitaatiota vastustavan voiman yksittäisissä pienemmän mittakaavan tihentymissä. Molekulaarisista pilvistä tehdyt havainnot osoittavat, että kaasun kineettinen eli liike-energia ylittää joissain tapauksissa jopa yhdellä kertaluokalla tavallisen lämpöliikkeen antamat arvot, mikä viittaa vahvasti esimerkiksi magneettisen turbulenssin voimakkaaseen rooliin merkittävimpänä pilvien luhistumista vastustavana voimana.
601 Jorden, eller Tellus (latin: Terra), är den tredje planeten från solen och den största av de så kallade stenplaneterna i solsystemet. Jorden har en naturlig satellit kallad månen eller Luna.
602 Med flera miljoner arter, inklusive människan, är jorden den enda himlakroppen där man vet att liv existerar. Planeten bildades för 4,54 miljarder år sedan och liv uppstod inom en miljard år från dess skapelse. Sedan dess har jordens biosfär markant förändrat atmosfären och andra icke biologiska förhållanden, vilket till exempel tillåtit aerobiska organismer att utvecklas i den syrerika miljön.
603 Jorden är formad som ett nästan perfekt klot. På grund av dess rotation och centrifugalkraftens inverkan på den elastiska jordmassan är dock omkretsen något större vid ekvatorn än över polerna. Jordskorpan, jordens yttre lager, är uppdelad i en rad olika segment, kallade kontinentalplattor, som långsamt rör sig över ytan. Omkring 71% av ytan är täckt av hav med saltvatten, återstoden består av öar och kontinenter. Flytande vatten är, så vitt man vet idag, nödvändigt för allt liv. Jordens inre är fortsatt aktiv med en relativt fast mantel, en flytande yttre kärna som genererar ett magnetfält, samt en fast inre kärna främst bestående av järn.
604 Jorden samverkar genom gravitationskraften med alla andra himlakroppar i den galax, Vintergatan som vi tillhör, där himlakropparna i vårt eget solsystem har störst inverkan med solen som den helt dominerande genom sin stora massa, men även till viss del månen i form av tidvattenfenomen. Jorden roterar ett varv runt solen för varje 366,26 gånger den roterar runt sin egen axel. Detta motsvaras av 365,26 soldagar och kallas för ett sideriskt år. Antalet soldagar är en mindre än antalet rotationer på grund av att jordens rörelse runt solen resulterar i en extra rotation runt dess axel i förhållande till solens position. Jordens rotationsaxel är vinklad 23,4° mot omloppsplanet vilket skapar årstider på ytan. Jordens enda naturliga satellit, månen, orsakar havens tidvatten, stabiliserar axellutningen och saktar långsamt ner planetens rotation. Ett bombardemang av kometer under jordens tidiga historia gav upphov till mycket av vattnet i haven. Sedan dess har nedslag av större asteroider vid ett flertal tillfällen orsakat våldsamma katastrofer på jordens yta.
605 Planetens mineral och de många produkterna av biosfären bidrar resurser som används för att försörja jordens mänskliga befolkning. Invånarna är uppdelade i omkring 200 självständiga stater som samverkar med varandra genom diplomati, resor, handel och militära handlingar. Människan lämnade jorden första gången 1961 då Jurij Gagarin nådde yttre rymden.
606 För 4,54 miljarder år sedan (med en osäkerhet på 1%)[10][11][12] bildades jorden och de andra planeterna ur solnebulosan, en skivformad massa av stoft och gas som blev över när solen föddes. Uppbyggandet av jorden genom ackretion var i stort sett över inom 10–20 miljoner år.[13] Till en början var jorden en smält och glödande massa, men efterhand kyldes de yttre delarna ner så pass mycket att vatten började ackumuleras i atmosfären och regn falla mot ytan vilket ledde till att en fast yttre skorpa bildades. Månen bildades strax därefter, möjligen som ett resultat av en kollision mellan jorden och en annan planet av ungefär Mars' storlek.[14] En stor del av denna materia skulle ha stannat på jorden medan en annan stor del slungades tillbaka ut i rymden. Av den materia som kastades tillbaka ut i rymden skulle en viss del hamnat i omloppsbana runt jorden och det är av detta som månen sedan tros ha skapats ur.[15]
607 Genom utgasning och vulkanisk aktivitet skapades en tidig uratmosfär. Kondensation av vattenånga tillsammans med tillförd is från asteroider, kometer och andra objekt i det tidiga solsystemet skapade jordens hav.[16] Till en början var haven så omfattande att det nästan inte fanns någon landmassa, men de har efterhand minskat i omfattning sedan dess. Under de senaste 2 miljarder åren har kontinenternas area fördubblats.[17][18] Sett över geologisk tidsskala på flera hundra miljoner år har jordens yta kontinuerligt förändrats. Kontinenterna rör sig över ytan och bildar ibland en superkontinent. För ungefär 750 miljoner år sedan började en av de tidigaste kända superkontinenterna, Rodinia brytas isär. Kontinenterna fördes sedan åter samman och bildade Pannotia för 600-540 miljoner år sedan och slutligen Pangaea som bröts isär för 180 miljoner år sedan.[19]
608 För närvarande är jorden det enda exempel vi har på en miljö som stödjer liv och dess evolution.[20] Genom kemiska reaktioner anses självreplikerande molekyler ha bildats för omkring 4 miljarder år sedan. Ungefär en halv miljard år senare levde den sista gemensamma förfadern för allt liv på jorden.[21] Utvecklingen av fotosyntes tillät att solens energi kunde användas direkt av livsformer. Detta resulterade i att syre ackumulerades i atmosfären varvid ozonskiktet uppstod i den övre atmosfären. När små celler började sammanfogas med större celler kunde utvecklingen av komplexa celler, kallade eukaryoter, påbörjas.[22] Vissa typer av cellkolonier blev alltmer specialiserade och utvecklades efterhand till äkta flercelliga organismer. Genom skyddet från ultraviolett strålning från ozonlagret kunde livet efterhand också kolonisera världen utanför den skyddade miljö under vattnet den hittills utvecklats i.[23]
609 Sedan 1960-talet har det framförts hypoteser om att mycket omfattande istider drabbade jorden för mellan 750 och 580 miljoner år sedan, under Neoproterozoikum. Glaciärer täckte större delen av planeten under ett tjockt istäcke. Denna hypotes kallas ofta för "Snöbollsjorden" (Snowball Earth) och är av särskilt stort intresse eftersom den föregick den kambriska explosionen där flercelligt liv började mångfaldigas.[24]
610 Efter den kambriska explosionen för ungefär 535 miljoner år sedan har det förekommit fem massutrotningar.[25] Den senaste gången detta skedde var för 65 miljoner år sedan när en kollision med en komet eller en asteroid sannolikt orsakade utrotningen av alla dinosaurier (förutom de som skulle utvecklas till fåglar) och många andra stora reptiler. Samtidigt lyckades små djur som däggdjur, vilka då mest liknade små gnagare. Sedan dess har jordens däggdjur utvecklats i många olika riktningar och för ett par miljoner år sedan började ett afrikanskt apliknande djur att gå upprätt på två ben.[26] Detta tillät att verktyg kunde användas och uppmuntrade kommunikation vilka tillsammans kunde förse den näring och stimulering som en större hjärna kräver. Utvecklingen av jordbruk och därefter samhällen har möjliggjort för människan att på en kort tid påverkat jorden på ett sätt som ingen annan art har,[27] vilket i stor omfattning påverkat annat liv på jorden.
611 Det nuvarande mönstret med istider började för ungefär 40 miljoner år sedan och intensifierades under Pleistocen för ungefär 3 miljoner år sedan. Polarområdena har sedan dess genomgått regelbundna cykler av nedisning och upptining, med en period av mellan 40 000 och 100 000 år. Den senaste istiden slutade för omkring 10 000 år sedan.[28]
612 Jordens framtid är nära knuten till solens framtid. På grund av ackumulationen av helium i solens kärna, som ett restprodukt av vätefusionen, ökar stjärnans luminositet långsamt. Under de kommande 1,1 miljarder åren väntas luminositeten öka med 10% och under de kommande 3,5 miljarder åren med hela 40%.[29] Klimatmodeller tyder på att ökningen av inkommande strålning kommer få svåra konsekvenser, inklusive en trolig förlust av jordens hav.[30]
613 Den ökande temperaturen kommer att accelerera kolcykeln, vilket riskerar minska koncentrationen av koldioxid i atmosfären till dödligt låga nivåer för växter om 900 miljoner år. Avsaknaden av vegetation skulle orsaka en förlust av syret i atmosfären och djurliv skulle därmed också utrotas inom ett mindre antal miljoner år.[17] Efter ytterligare en miljard år beräknas allt vatten på jordens yta ha försvunnit[31] och den globala medeltemperaturen nå 70 grader.[17] Vissa har kommit till slutsatsen att jorden kan ha så lite som 500 miljoner år kvar av goda förhållanden för flercelligt liv.[32] Även om solen hade haft evigt liv och var stabil skulle den pågående nedkylningen av jordens kärna kunna orsaka en förlust av en större del av atmosfären och haven på grund av minskad vulkanism.[33]
614 Solen kommer som en del av dess utveckling att bli en röd jätte om ungefär 5 miljarder år. Modeller förutspår att solen kommer expandera till omkring 250 gånger dess nuvarande storlek, vilket skulle göra att dess yta hamnar nära jordens nuvarande position.[29][34][35] Jordens öde är inte lika klart. Som en röd jätte kommer solen förlora ungefär 30% av dess massa, vilket innebär att jorden gradvis kommer emigrera till en omloppsbana längre ut, ungefär 1,7 gånger dagens avstånd från solen. Planeten tros därför undvika att slukas av den växande solens yttre tunna atmosfär, men det mesta, om inte allt, kvarvarande liv skulle vid det här laget vara utrotat av den mycket höga luminositeten.[29] Andra simuleringar förutspår att jorden istället kommer sjunka in mot solen på grund av tidvatteneffekter och friktion mot den expanderande solatmosfären, för att slutligen helt slukas av solen och förstöras.[34]
615 Jorden är en av stenplaneterna, vilket innebär att den huvudsakligen är uppbyggd av fast och smält sten till skillnad från gasjättar som Jupiter. Den är den största av de fyra stenplaneterna i solsystemet, både avseende diameter och massa. Av dessa planeter har jorden också den största densiteten, den största ytgravitationen, det starkaste magnetiska fältet och det kortaste dygnet.[36] Jorden är dessutom den enda stenplaneten med aktiv plattektonik.[37]
616 orden är till formen mycket nära en något avplattad sfäroid, en rund form med en utbuktning vid ekvatorn. Avvikelsen mot den exakta geoiden är som mest 100 meter.[38] Medeldiametern hos sfäroiden är ungefär 12 742 km. Något mindre exakt är avståndet 40 000 km/π eftersom metern ursprungligen definierades som 1/10 000 000 av avståndet mellan ekvatorn till nordpolen via Paris, Frankrike.[39]
617 Jordens snabba rotation är orsaken till utbuktningen vilken orsakar en diameter genom ekvatorn som är cirka 43 km större än diametern från pol till pol.[40] De största lokala avvikelserna på jordens steniga yta är Mount Everest (8 848 meter över den lokala havsnivån) och Marianergraven (10 911 meter under den lokala havsnivån. Om man jämför med en perfekt ellipsoid har jorden därmed en toleransnivå på ungefär 0,17%, vilket är mindre än de 0,22% som en biljardboll tillåts avvika.[41] På grund av utbuktningen är punkten på jorden som befinner sig längst från mitten faktiskt inte Mount Everest utan vulkanen Chimborazo i Equador.[42][43]
618 Jordens totala massa är ungefär på 5,98×1024 kg. Den består främst av järn (32,1%), syre (30,1%), kisel (15,1%), magnesium (13,9%), svavel (2,9%), nickel (1,8%), kalcium (1,5%) och aluminium (1,4%). Återstående 1,2% består av spårmängder av andra ämnen. På grund av att tyngre ämnen tenderar förekomma i större omfattning nära kärnan anses denna främst bestå av järn (88,8%) med mindre mängder av nickel (5,8%) samt svavel (4,5%) och mindre än 1% av övriga ämnen.[44]
619 Beräkningar tyder på att lite drygt 47% av jordens skorpa består av syre och nästan samtliga vanligare bergarter är någon form av oxider. Klor-, svavel- och fluorföreningar är de enda viktiga undantagen, men trots detta är deras andel vanligen mindre än 1%. De vanligaste oxiderna är kisel-, aluminium-, järn-, kalcium-, magnesium-, kalium- och natriumoxider.
620 Jordens inre är uppdelat i olika lager efter kemiska eller reologiska egenskaper. Det yttersta lagret består av en fast skorpa med huvudsakligen silikater, därefter följer en plastisk trögflytande mantel, en betydligt mer lättflytande yttre kärna och en fast inre kärna. Skorpan skiljs från manteln av den så kallade Mohorovičić-diskontinuiteten och tjockleken varierar med ett medel på 6 km under haven och 30-50 km på kontinenterna. [45] Den inre kärnan tros rotera med en något högre vinkelhastighet än den övriga planeten och avancerar med 0,1-0,5° per år.[46]
621 Den inre värmen hos jorden genereras huvudsakligen av det radioaktiva sönderfallet av isotoperna kalium-40, uran-238 och torium-232. Deras halveringstider är 1,5 miljarder, 4 miljarder respektive 14 miljarder år.[47] Vid planetens innersta delar kan temperaturen nå upp mot 7 000 K (cirka 6 700°C) och trycket 360 GPa.[48] En del av kärnans termiska energi transporteras mot ytan av mantelplymer vilket är en typ av konvektionsfenomen där materia med hög temperatur stiger i förhållande till omgivande materia med något lägre temperatur. Dessa plymer kan orsaka så kallade heta fläckar och ihållande utbrott av stora mängder lättflytande basalt.[49]
622 De yttre delarna av jordens inre består av två lager. Det översta av dessa, litosfären, består av skorpan och den stelnade delen av den övre delarna av manteln. Under litosfären ligger astenosfären som bildar den inre delen av den yttre manteln. Astenosfären uppför sig som superhettad materia som är i ett halvflytande, plastiskt, tillstånd. [52]
623 Litosfären "flyter" i praktiken på astenosfären och är uppdelad i olika kontinentalplattor. Dessa plattor är stela segment som rör sig i förhållande till varandra vid tre typer av gränser. Konvergerande gränser uppstår där två plattor rör sig mot varandra, divergerande gränser där de rör sig från varandra och omvandlingsgränser där de rör sig längs med en annan platta. Jordbävningar, vulkanutbrott, uppbyggande av bergskedjor och djuphavsgravar kan uppstå vid sådana gränser.[53]
624 Nämnvärda mindre kontinentalplattor är den Indiska kontinentalplattan, den Karibiska kontinentalplattan, Nazcaplattan utanför Sydamerikas västkust och Scotiaplattan i södra Atlanten. Den Indoaustraliska plattan är faktiskt sedan mellan 50 och 55 miljoner år tillbaka sammanfogad med den Indiska kontinentalplattan. Havsplattorna färdas snabbare än de övriga och den snabbaste av alla är Cocosplattan som rör sig med 75 mm/år[54] medan den Eurasiska kontinentalplattan rör sig långsammast med 21 mm/år.[55]
625 Jordens terräng varierar mycket från plats till plats. Ungefär 70,8%[57] av ytan täcks av vatten, med stora delar av kontinentalsockeln under havsnivån. Under vattenytan finns vanliga berg, vulkaner och bergskedjor, inklusive den mycket stora Mittatlantiska ryggen som sträcker sig över en stor del av jorden. Även djuphavsgravar, undervattenskanjoner, undervattensplatåer och djuphavsslätter finns i den vattentäckta delen av jorden. De kvarstående 29,2% som inte täcks av vatten består av berg, öknar, slätter, platåer och andra geomorfologiska företeelser.
626 Ytan genomgår omfattande förändringar på geologiska tidsskalor orsakat av erosion och tidigare nämnda plattektonik. Företeelser på ytan som byggs upp eller deformeras av plattektonik vittras långsamt ner av nederbörd, värmeväxlingar, vind och kemiska effekter. Glaciärer, kusterosion, uppbyggnad av korallrev och nedslag av större meteoriter och asteroider från rymden bidrar också till att omvandla ytan.[59]
627 Efterhand som kontinentalplattorna rör sig över planeten pressas havsbottnen ner under kantjerna. Samtidigt skapar ett flöde av materia från manteln ny havsbotten vid divergerande gränser längs mitthavsryggar. Kombinationen av dessa processer gör att materian som bildar havsplattorna hela tiden återförs ner i jorden och på så sätt återvinns. Den största delen av havsbottnen är mindre än 100 miljoner år gammal. Den äldsta havsbottnen kan finnas i västra Stilla havet med en uppskattad ålder på 200 miljoner år. Som jämförelse har man hittat fossil på land med en ålder på omkring 3 miljarder år.[60][61]
628 Kontinentalskorpan består av materia med längre densitet såsom de magmatiska bergarterna granit och andesit. Mindre vanlig är basalt, en vulkanisk bergart med högre densitet som är vanligast på havsbottnen.[62] Sedimentära bergarter bildas från ansamling av sediment som packas ihop och efterhand blir till sten. Närmare 75% av kontinenternas ytor består av sedimentära bergarter, men de står bara för omkring 5% av jordskorpan.[63] Den tredje typen av bergarter på jorden kallas för metamorfiska bergarter. Dessa skapas genom omvandling från redan existerande sten genom högt tryck, hög temperatur eller en kombination av de båda. De vanligaste silikatmineralerna på jordens yta inkluderar kvarts, fältspat, amfibol, glimmer, pyroxen och olivin.[64] Bland vanliga karbonatmineraler återfinns kalkspat, aragonit och dolomit.[65]
629 Den yttersta delen av jorden som består av jord kallas för pedosfären och genomgår olika omvandlingsprocesser. För närvarande är den totala arealen som kan användas som åkermark 13,1% av den totala landytan, men bara 4,71% stödjer permanenta planteringar.[6]
630 Altituden på jordens landyta varierar från den lägsta punkten 418 meter under havsnivå vid Döda havet till maximala 8 848 meter över havsytan på toppen av Mount Everest. I medel befinner sig landytan 840 meter över havsnivån.[66]
631 Lufttrycket på jorden är i genomsnitt 101,325 kPa med en skalhöjd på 8,5 km.[7] Atmosfären består av 79% kväve och 21% syre tillsammans med mindre mängder vattenånga, argon, koldioxid och många andra gaser. Höjden på troposfären, den delen av atmosfären som brukar sägas innehålla vädret, varierar med latitud. Vid polerna är den omkring 8 km medan den når så högt som 17 km vid ekvatorn, men siffrorna varierar något beroende på årstid och väder.[67]
632 Jordens biosfär har markant ändrat planetens atmosfär sedan skapelsen för 4,54 miljarder år sedan. Fotosyntesen utvecklades för omkring 2,7 miljarder år sedan vilket skapade den den atmosfärssammansättning huvudsakligen bestående av kväve och syre som fortfarande är ungefär densamma än idag. Denna förändring tillät aerobiska organismer att utvecklas och ledde även till bildandet av ozonlagret som skyddar från solens skadliga ultravioletta strålning, något som i sin tur gjorde det möjligt för livet att ta steget upp på land. Atmosfären transporterar också vattenånga, dämpar temperaturväxlingar mellan dag och natt, tillgodoser ett behov av olika gaser som livsformer kan ha samt skyddar i viss mån mot nedfallande meteoriter från rymden.[68] Atmosfären är också orsaken till växthuseffekten som gör jorden varmare än den annars skulle ha varit genom att vissa molekyler absorberar värmestrålning utsänd eller reflekterad från marken. Utan växthuseffekten skulle jordens medeltemperatur istället för nuvarande +15 °C ha varit -18 °C vilket skulle ha gjort åtminstone flercelligt liv osannolikt.[57]
633 Livet på jorden uppkom för drygt 3,5 miljarder år sedan, strax efter det att jorden kylts ner så mycket att vatten fanns i flytande form. De äldsta omdiskuterade tecknen på liv är fossiliserade bakterier, som hittats i australiensiska stenar. I 3,9 miljarder år gamla bergarter från grönländska borrtagningar har man funnit differenser i proportioner av kolisotoper, vilket tyder på biologisk ämnesomsättning. Kanske är livet ännu äldre.
634 Med livet ändrade sig jordens utveckling och jordskorpans utseende tydligt. Syreandelen i atmosfären ökade, och jordens albedo ändrade sig. De senaste ändringarna sker huvudsakligen genom människans påverkan. Befolkningen ökar snabbt, idag huvudsakligen i utvecklingsländer.
635 Jorden är den enda planet i solsystemet där det finns vatten på ytan. 71 % av dess yta består av vatten (varav 97 % är havsvatten och 3 % färskvatten) som delar upp jorden i fem oceaner och sju kontinenter. Jordens plats i solsystemet, vulkaniska aktivitet, gravitation, växthuseffekt, magnetfält och dess syrerika atmosfär gör tillsammans att jorden är den vattenplanet den är.
636 Egentligen ligger jorden så långt bort från solen att vattnet borde frysa till is, men genom växthuseffekten hålls temperaturen uppe. Så har det dock inte alltid varit. Paleontologiska tecken tyder på att oceanerna först koloniserades av blågröna alger (cyanobakterier), men att haven därefter frös till is under en period på 10–100 miljoner år.
637 På andra planeter, såsom Venus, förstörs vattenångan av ultraviolett strålning från solen, vilket gör att vätet joniseras och förs bort av solvinden. Teorin om denna mycket långsamma men obevekliga process förklarar varför Venus saknar vatten. I avsaknad av väte binds syret i mineraler i marken.
638 I den del av jordens atmosfär, som kallas stratosfären, finns längst upp ett tunt lager ozon, som absorberar det mesta av denna ultravioletta strålning, vilket gör att den så kallade krackningen minskar. Ozon kan i sin tur bara produceras i en atmosfär med stora mängder obundna syremolekyler, vilket uppstår genom närvaron av biosfären (växterna). Även magnetosfären skyddar jonosfären från den skadliga solvinden. Oroväckande är att det skyddande ozonlagret utarmas som följd av diverse mänskliga aktiviteter, bl a utsläpp av freon. Över polerna är det svårast – ozonhålen.
639 Vulkanerna gör att vattenånga ständigt förs upp från jordens inre. Plattektoniken gör att kol och vatten i form av kalksten genom subduktion tvingas ned i manteln. Vid vulkanutbrott frigörs sedan koldioxid och vattenånga. Det har uppskattats att manteln kan innehålla hela tio gånger så mycket vatten som det finns i oceanerna – vatten som dock kommer att förbli bundet i jorden.
640 Det tar jorden 23 timmar, 56 minuter och 4,09054 sekunder (1 sideriskt dygn) att rotera ett varv runt sin axel (i förhållande till stjärnorna). Medelsoldygnet är 24 timmar och 0,002 sekunder. Eftersom jorden roterar moturs sett från nordpolen (i östlig riktning), så tycks andra himlakroppar sett från norra halvklotet röra sig medurs (i västlig riktning) över himlen (och moturs från södra halvklotet).
641 Jorden har en naturlig satellit, Månen, som roterar ett varv runt jorden på 27,321662 dagar eller ca 27 1/3 dag (1 siderisk månad). Avståndet till månen är ca 384 000 km. En radiosignal som sänds ut från jorden når månen efter cirka 1,255 sekunder. Månens bana runt jorden ligger inte i samma plan som jordens bana runt solen, utan lutar ca 5° i förhållande till detta. Om det inte vore så skulle det bli en solförmörkelse en gång i månaden, och dessutom kanske bara omkring ekvatorn. Efter ca 18 år upprepar sig månförmörkelsemönstret. (Se nutation.)
642 En planet är en relativt stor himlakropp som rör sig i en keplersk bana runt en stjärna. Är massan så stor att fusion börjar ske och avge synligt ljus räknas himlakroppen dock som stjärna och inte planet. Definitionen av vad som ska räknas som planet har varierat under årens lopp. Namnet planet kommer från grekiskans πλανήτης, planētēs, och betyder vandrare eftersom forskare observerade att planeterna förflyttade sig över stjärnhimlen till skillnad från stjärnorna som alltid behåller sina inbördes positioner i förhållande till varandra. Ett annat namn för planeter är därför vandringsstjärnor.
643 Det är inte med säkerhet känt hur planeter skapas. Den förhärskande teorin är att planeter uppkommer i samband med att solen de kretsar runt bildas. En stjärna bildas, när jättelika instabila gas och stoftmoln genom sin egen gravitation drar sig samman, komprimeras och bildar en protostjärna. Allt material i det långsamt roterande gasmolnet komprimeras inte till en sol, utan mycket samlas i en protoplanetär skiva. Längre ut från centrum i det blivande solsystemet genomgår andra delar av gas och rymdstoft liknande ihopklumpningar, fast i mindre skala. De lokala koncentrationerna av materia komprimeras och bildar i sin tur protoplaneter.
644 Under tiden fortsätter sammandragningen av protostjärnan tills trycket och temperaturen ökar så mycket att kärnreaktioner (fusion) startas och stjärnan tänds. Solvinden som uppstått av den nytända stjärnan blåser bort den mesta delen av gasen från solsystemets inre delar. Resultatet blir att de inre planeterna Merkurius, Venus, jorden och Mars är små och steniga utan speciellt mycket gas eller vätska, medan de yttre Jupiter, Saturnus, Uranus och Neptunus är stora gasplaneter. Där finns nämligen gasen kvar och kan kondensera till planeter.
645 Ett nyfött solsystem är väldigt instabilt och innehåller fortfarande en stor mängd materia. För de nyfödda planeterna väntar nu en period av våldsamt meteoritbombardemang från ovan. I vissa fall till och med så våldsamma händelser som sammanslagningar av protoplaneter.
646 Andra protoplaneter som undgår kollision kan fångas upp av större planeters gravitation och bli månar. Det finns en teori om att månen och jorden var inblandade i just en sådan händelse. De sammanstötte med varandra varvid jorden då tog en stor del av månens massa. Efter närkontakten gick månen in i bana runt jorden. Efterhand som forskarna får mer kunskap om planeter utanför vårt eget solsystem, kan denna teori om hur planeter skapas komma att revideras, ändras eller till och med avfärdas.
647 En dvärgplanet uppfyller de två första, men inte det tredje kriteriet. Dessutom ställs kravet att en dvärgplanet inte får vara en satellit (se nedan). Alla övriga objekt i solsystemet förutom satelliter går under benämningen "mindre himlakroppar i solsystemet" ("small solar-system bodies").
648 Vad som definieras som en satellit säger denna planetdefinition ingenting om, men på IAU:s frågesida definieras en satellit som en himlakropp som har tillräckligt hög massa för att kallas planet men går i en omloppsbana runt en (annan) planet och det gemensamma masscentret för de båda ligger inuti planeten. Notera att denna definition enbart säger något om himlakropparna i vårt eget solsystem.
649 Alla planeter i vårt solsystem är namngivna efter romerska gudar, utom Uranus som fått sitt namn efter den grekiske himmelsguden (dock i namnets latinska form), och Jorden som inte räknades som en planet av de gamla astronomerna, utan snarare som universums mittpunkt - det vetenskapliga namnet på jorden; Tellus, är dock efter en latinsk jordgudinna. Planeternas ursprungliga antal var sju; Månen, Merkurius, Venus, Solen, Mars, Jupiter och Saturnus, uppräknat efter Ptolemaios geocentriska världsbild. Efter hand som de astronomiska kunskaperna växte, plockades solen och månen bort som planeter, och de numera accepterade planeterna lades till.
650 Romarna trodde att de sju gudar som planeterna fått sina namn från, var de som turades om att övervaka det som hände i världen från sin position på himlavalvet. Turordningen lever kvar i namnen på veckodagarna än i våra dagar, framförallt i de romanska språken: Söndag (solen), Måndag (månen), franskans mardi (Mars), mercredi (Merkurius), jeudi (Jupiter), vendredi (Venus) och engelskans Saturday (Saturnus).
651 Создавая бабочек, природа заботилась вовсе не об их красоте, а о том, чтобы приспособить этих беззащитных животных к среде обитания. Ведь рисунки крыльев бабочки часто хорошо сочетаются с фоном ландшафта той местности, среди которой само насекомое обитает. Обратим внимание на самую известную бабочку — капустницу. Она выращивает свое потомство на покрытых седым налетом листьях капусты, а сама питается нектаром бледных цветков растений. Значит, ей необходим светлый цвет для маскировки в среде. У некоторых видов белянок по белому фону крыльев разбросаны темные точки. Это делает их еще менее заметными в среде обитания. Летает это насекомое медленно, делает в полете зигзаги. Вот бежит за белянкой мальчик с сачком, пытается поймать ее. Махнул своим сачком — бабочка исчезла. С глубоким волнением раскрывает ловец свой сачок: увы, пленницы там нет. Где же она? В таких случаях капустницы имеют привычку садиться на ближайшее растение или на землю, складывать свои крылышки и превращаться как бы в невидимок. Правда, свойство складывать крылышки, как доказывают исследователи, связано у бабочек с терморегуляцией, но оно еще помогает спасаться и от преследования врагов.
652 Есть другого рода бабочки, которые, садясь на какой-то предмет, не могут складывать свои крылья, подобно белянкам. Но зато крылышки у них украшены разнообразными рисунками. Среди ярких цветов растений всегда можно заметить летающих в таком же ярком наряде бабочек. Когда это существо сидит неподвижно, то на окружающем фоне его чрезвычайно трудно заметить.
653 На крыльях у бархатниц, имеющих широкую округлую форму, на буром, сером и коричневом фоне вырисовываются глазчатые пятна, или глазки, удаленные от уязвимых частей тела, то есть головы и грудки. Эти глазки спасают бабочку от врагов, главным образом, птиц. Обнаружив свою жертву, птица клюет ее именно в кончик крыла. Бабочка остается без особых повреждений, взлетает и спасается от гибели.
654 На юге нашей страны обитает бабочка с весьма странным названием — мертвая голова. Но почему же так? На спине у этого существа четко вырисовываются человеческий череп с глазницами. Что означает этот странный рисунок, сказать трудно, но бабочку довольно трудно заметить, когда она спокойно сидит даже на хорошо освещенном месте.
655 Многих бабочек спасает от врагов оригинальная форма крыльев, вернее, сама их укладка в тот момент, когда насекомое садится на какой-то предмет. У монашенки крылышки складываются назад, примерно как у птичек. Они еще покрыты зигзагообразными темными линиями, вырисовывающимися на беловато-сером фоне. Голова совершенно не выделяется, поэтому сидящее существо напоминает сорвавшийся и приценившийся где-то пересохший листок дерева или другого растения. Монашенки обычно садятся на стволы деревьев, поэтому цвет их крыльев почти такой, как у древесной коры. Посадка у них спокойная, что также хорошо маскирует этих бабочек.
656 А теперь поговорим, казалось бы, о странном явлении. Многие ночные бабочки непременно летят на свет. Ученые заинтересовались такой особенностью этих животных с давних пор, но до сего времени в науке нет исчерпывающего объяснения: что именно заставляет бабочек стремиться к источникам света, прилетать к фонарям, светящимся окнам домов? Изучая столь загадочное явление, исследователи подметили, что не все виды ночных бабочек реагируют на источники света. Эти существа более охотно летят к хорошо освещенным предметам. Если где-то на поле или на лесной поляне установить две лампочки — одну на 250, другую на 1000 ватт, то ко второй лампочке прилетит больше бабочек. Однако если обратить внимание на видовой состав этих полуночников, то здесь никакой закономерности обнаружить невозможно.
657 На юге нашей страны мир бабочек гораздо богаче, чем на севере. Если отыскать в летнее время где-то под горой безветренное место, повесить там яркий фонарь, то с наступлением сумерек сюда начнут прилетать бабочки. Они будут поочередно лететь всю ночь. Последние появятся уже перед рассветом, покружатся возле фонаря и улетят. Бражники прилетают на свет только после того, как насытятся нектаром цветов. Эти насекомые очень подвижны, в поисках пищи преодолевают за ночь огромные расстояния, поэтому быстро находят источники света. В рисунчатой окраске у них преобладает золотисто-желтый и золотисто-коричневый цвет, поэтому на ярком свету они выглядят исключительно красиво.
658 Волнянки по сравнению с бражниками неуклюжие, ворсистые, белоснежного, серого или желтоватого цвета с шелковистым блеском. Они также охотно летят на огонек. Если у многих видов на свет прилетают женские особи, то у волнянок — златогузок самцы. У монашенок на огонек летят лишь самки. Есть виды, у которых на свет прилетают самки только в период размножения. Линейчатые бражники оживленно летят к источникам света перед дождем. Так что установить здесь какую-то закономерность по имеющимся наблюдениям довольно трудно: есть также сведения, что прилет к свету у бабочек связан с изменением погоды.
659 Прилетая к горящему фонарю, бабочки начинают живо описывать круги. Оказывается, во время полета эти насекомые ориентируются по лучу света, летят всегда в таком положении, чтобы луч приходился перпендикулярно оси их тела. Поскольку светящиеся лампы являются точечными источниками света, то лучи от них исходят радиально. Подлетая к такому источнику, насекомое стремится поставить свое тело перпендикулярно лучам, а они располагаются кругом. Поэтому-то бабочки начинают летать вокруг светящихся фонарей.
660 Эти существа наделены весьма сложной системой органов чувств. Ученым пришлось приложить много труда, пока они изучили эту систему. В 1922 году американский зоолог Д. Миннич опубликовал интереснейшую заметку, в которой сообщил, что органы осязания расположены у бабочек совсем не там, где их искали, а на лапках. Этот исследователь тщательно экспериментировал с бабочкой под названием адмирал, которая распространена в Америке и Европе. Питается она жидкой пищей, в основном нектаром цветов, добывая его своим длинным хоботком. Органы чувств у адмирала расположены на лапках. Именно они ощущают наличие нектара в цветках и управляют действиями хоботка. Если задние лапки насекомого сухие, то хоботок находится в пассивном состоянии. Но стоит только смочить чувствительные окончания лапок, как он сразу же разворачивается и приходит в активное состояние. Если же бабочку досыта напоить нектаром, то ее лапки перестают реагировать на раздражители и не передают никакой информации хоботку. А как только бабочка проголодалась, ее лапки сразу же начинают реагировать на присутствие влаги. Однако самая высокая чувствительность лапок отмечается при их соприкосновении с жидкостью, содержащей высокую концентрацию сахара. В этом случае чувствительность лапок превышает чувствительность человеческого языка в 256 раз.
661 Исследователям также долгое время не удавалось установить, обладают ли бабочки слухом. В старое время по этому поводу существовали только предположения специалистов. Большинство мнений сводилось к тому, что эти существа вообще глухие. Однако позднее немецкому ученому Эггерсу удалось доказать совершенно противоположное путем упорных и многолетних усилий. Нужно сказать, что исследователю здорово повезло. Он начал искать органы слуха у этих существ именно там, где было нужно, и в конце концов нашел их. Они ведь расположены у бабочек совсем не там, где у высших животных, а на груди, на месте ее соединения с брюшком. Когда бабочка находится в спокойном состоянии, то слуховой аппарат не реагирует на посторонние звуки. Но как только послышался легкий шум собственных крыльев или крыльев посторонней бабочки, то органы слуха тут же активизируются: сидящая бабочка как бы вздрагивает.
662 Слуховой аппарат у этого существа имеет тесную взаимосвязь с деятельностью других органов. Если повредить дыхательные органы, то насекомое теряет способность реагировать и на шумы. В лучшем случае с появлением шума оно будет слегка шевелить усиками.
663 Мы как-то привыкли к тому, что бабочки очень лениво летают, у них вялый взлет. Вспорхнет с листочка белянка, пролетит с десяток метров и тут же снова садится. Но в природе существуют такие бабочки, которых можно назвать феноменами по красоте и дальности полета. Оранжево-коричневая бабочка монах по внешнему виду мало отличается от других своих сородичей. Но она удивляет своими прекрасными полетами. Родина ее - Северная Америка, там она проводит лето, а на зиму, подобно перелетным птицам, улетает на юг. Из Канады это насекомое совершает перелет в южную Калифорнию, где не бывает суровых зим. Но это не столь удивительно, все-таки там расстояние не слишком велико. Поразительно другое — монах направляется на зимовку в Новую Зеландию, покрывая расстояние до 3600 километров. Ведь этой пеструшке необходимо пересекать океан. А скорость полета у нее не так уж велика — 12 километров в час. Как же этому существу удается совершать дальние перелеты? Оказывается, на встречающихся в океане островах бабочка останавливается, отдыхает, подкрепляется и продолжает свой путь. А если на большом протяжении не встречается никаких клочков земли, то насекомое садится на воду. Посидит, отдохнет и снова в дорогу.
664 Да, бабочки прекрасные и загадочные существа, но они столь же и коварны. Об этом нужно сказать непременно. Ведь их личинки обладают чрезвычайной прожорливостью, поэтому приносят большой вред растительности. Каждая бабочка откладывает свои яйца на определенные виды растений. Если количество этих видов ограничено, приносимый бабочками ущерб бывает огромным. В 1924 году личинки озимой совки съели столько зерна, сколько можно было бы нагрузить в железнодорожный состав длиной 100 километров. Пятью годами позже ученые подсчитали ущерб, нанесенный личинками мотылька. Они съели продуктов на такую сумму, на которую можно было бы построить новый Днепрогэс. Может быть, кто-то подумает, что бабочки разгорячились только в нашем веке? Ничего подобного, и в прошлых ветках наблюдалось то же самое.
665 В 1869 году астроном Л. Трувелло привез несколько яиц непарного шелкопряда к себе домой, в американский штат Массачусетс. По рассеянности этот исследователь потерял какую-то часть этих яичек. Они попали в благоприятную почву и начали быстро развиваться. Спустя некоторое время здесь развелось столько бабочек, что их личинки вызвали настоящую катастрофу — уничтожили всю листву деревьев не только в садах, но и в лесах, причем на огромнейшей территории штата.
666 Гусеницы зеленой дубовой листовертки поедают почки и листья дуба. Вспышки массового размножения этих бабочек наблюдаются циклически — обычно раз в 7 лет и длятся 2 — 3 года. В это время дубравы, где свирепствует вредитель, стоят обезображенные: листья бывают почти полностью съедены, изуродованы или скрючены. С ветвей на тоненьких паутинках спускаются жирные гусеницы, падают на землю пушистые шкурки куколок. В теплые солнечные дни июня начинается массовый лёт молодых листоверток. Их бывает так много, что лес издали кажется окутанным зеленовато-белым облачком.
667 Есть бабочки под названием шишковая огневка и шишковая листовертка. Сами они невзрачны, но обе беспощадные пожиратели еловых семян. Гусеницы огневки после выхода из отложенных на зеленые шишки яичек углубляются в них, поедая чешую и семена. Листовертка же сначала выгрызает стержень шишки, а затем уже поедает семена. Зимой шишки вместе с гусеницами опадают на землю, не раскрываясь. Нередко эти вредители уничтожают 60— 70 процентов урожая еловых семян.
668 Не менее беспощадны по отношению к растительности гусеницы пядениц и шелкопрядов. Сибирский шелкопряд — крупная мохнатая бабочка серого или бурого цвета с темными полосками и с большими пятнышками на каждом переднем крыле. Гусеницы этого насекомого имеют приличный аппетит: каждая их них за свою жизнь съедает до 40 граммов хвои, но может также питаться молодыми побегами и корой деревьев. Если лес подвергался массовому нашествию шелкопряда в течение двух лет, то он уже обречен на гибель, его лучше вырубить, ибо деревья настолько теряют силу, что в дальнейшем не могут существовать и все равно погибают.
669 усеницы сосновой, крыжовниковой и некоторых других пядениц имеют странную «походку». Их очень легко заметить, поскольку они передвигаются не прямо, а сгибая периодически свое тело коромыслом. Это связано с тем, что ножки у причудливого существа имеются только на передней части тела. Во время передвижения гусеница цепляется ими за субстрат, затем подтягивает свое тело, которое при этом легко сгибается. Когда гусеница движется по земле, то создается такое впечатление, будто она измеряет свой участок. Сосновая пяденица особенно свирепствует в засушливые годы, съедая начисто хвою сосны.
670 И, наконец, несколько слов о гусеницах капустницы, которые приспособились питаться листьями растений семейства крестоцветных, особенно капусты. Чаше всего от них страдает белокочанная капуста. На этом растении почти всегда можно видеть беловато-зеленых червячков, достигающих длины до трех сантиметров. Они сидят на листе почти неподвижно, как на верхней, так и на нижней его сторонах. Тело гусеницы как бы просвечивает, оно внутри бывает набито массой из капустной листвы. Прожорливость этих вредителей колоссальная. Если на большом листе поселились хотя бы три гусеницы, то через несколько дней от него останется только стержень с прожилками.
671 Да, бабочки имеют, казалось бы, большой порок, но теряют ли они из-за этого право называться существами прекрасными? Нет. Их гусеницами питаются миллионы птиц, пернатые выкармливают ими своих птенцов. Так что ничего в природе особенно не покритикуешь. 
672 Бабочки (и их близкие родственники — мотыльки и вечерницы) относятся к семейству, носящему научное название Lepidoptera, что означает «чешуекрылые»
673 Крылья бабочек не только красивы — они гораздо сильнее, чем может показаться на первый взгляд. Случается, что во время миграций отдельные виды бабочек перелетают через весь континент. Крылья некоторых видов бабочек пронизаны кровеносными сосудами; кровь содержит особые химические вещества, предохраняющие крылья от замерзания, если холодная погода застанет бабочку в пути.
674 Давайте рассмотрим остальное тело бабочки. Как и у прочих насекомых, ее тело состоит из трех основных отделов: головы, груди (торакса) и брюшка. К грудному отделу крепятся три пары ножек, каждая из которых состоит из четырех сегментов. Ножки первой пары зачастую являются очень слабыми, и потому бабочка держит их сложенными чуть ниже головы.
675 Зрение у бабочки относительно неплохое, однако для нее гораздо важнее усики-антенны, являющиеся мощнейшими органами чувств. Они растут из передней части головы и способны на большом расстоянии улавливать запахи. Происходит
676 она может попробовать листья на вкус посредством ножек! Ощупав лапками поверхность листа, она может понять, пригоден ли он для откладывания яиц.
677 Иногда бывает трудно отличить самца бабочки от самки, но у некоторых видов имеются четкие отличительные признаки. Например, у самца одного из видов бабочки-белянки на кончиках крыльев имеются оранжевые отметины, а у самки крылья чисто белые.
678 В разных регионах мира встречаются различные виды бабочек — ученые насчитывают около 18 000 видов и постоянно продолжают открывать новые. Однако многие бабочки становятся чрезвычайно редкими — в основном из-за уничтожения среды их обитания, например вырубки леса для строительства домов, — и потому занесены в список исчезающих видов. Многие редкие виды бабочек сейчас сохраняются в специальных питомниках, где насекомым создаются благоприятные условия для размножения.
679 Планеты Солнечной системы делятся на две группы — планеты земной группы и планеты-гиганты. Для планет земной группы характерна большая средняя плотность. Можно предположить, что у Меркурия, обладающего большой по сравнению с другими планетами плотностью, есть плотное железное ядро, в котором содержится около 60 % массы планеты; Венера, по массе и плотности сходная с Землёй, имеет в своём центре ядро, более богатое железом, чем Земля, а плотность силикатов в её оболочке несколько выше, чем в оболочке Земли; Земля же имеет сложную структурную оболочку (мантию), простирающуюся до глубины 2900 км, а ниже находится ядро, по-видимому металлическое (железное), на границе с мантией — жидкое, а у центра — твёрдое; у Марса, имеющего сравнительно малую плотность, если и есть железное ядро, то оно невелико (не больше 30 % радиуса, а точнее, 15-20 %), а плотность силикатных пород его оболочки несколько выше, чем у Земли.
680 У планет-гигантов очень низкая средняя плотность и специфический химический состав атмосфер. Это свидетельствуют о том, что они состоят из вещества, подобного солнечному, главным образом из водорода и гелия. Есть гипотеза, что металлическое ядро Юпитера жидкое, так как у Юпитера существует мощное магнитное поле, значительно более мощное, чем у Земли. Сходную с Юпитером структуру имеет Сатурн. Более плотные Уран и Нептун имеют, по-видимому, ядро из смеси воды, аммиака и метана в жидкой или твёрдой фазе, окружённое массивной водородно-гелиевой атмосферой, на которую приходится, однако, лишь порядка 10 % массы.
681 Термин «карликовая планета» был принят в 2006 году в рамках классификации обращающихся вокруг Солнца тел на три категории. Тела, достаточно большие для того, чтобы расчистить окрестности своей орбиты, определены как планеты, а недостаточно большие, чтобы достичь даже гидростатического равновесия, — как малые тела Солнечной системы. Карликовые планеты занимают промежуточное положение между этими двумя категориями. Данное определение встретило как одобрение, так и критику, и до сих пор оспаривается некоторыми учёными.
682 Международным астрономическим союзом официально признаны пять карликовых планет: Церера, Плутон, Хаумеа, Макемаке, Эрида; однако предполагается, что по меньшей мере ещё 40 из известных объектов в Солнечной системе принадлежат к этой категории. По оценкам учёных, может быть обнаружено до 200 карликовых планет в поясе Койпера и до 2000 карликовых планет с учётом объектов за его пределами. Классификация тел с характеристиками карликовых планет в других планетных системах не определена.
683 Нижний и верхний пределы размера и массы карликовых планет не указаны в решении МАС. Нет строгих ограничений на верхние пределы, и объект больше или массивнее Меркурия с неочищенными окрестостями орбиты может классифицироваться как карликовая планета.
684 Нижний предел определяется понятием гидростатически равновесной формы, однако размер и масса объекта, который достиг такой формы, неизвестен. Эмпирические наблюдения наводят на мысль, что они могут сильно различаться в зависимости от состава и истории объекта. Первоисточник предварительного решения МАС, определяющего гидростатически равновесную форму, применяется «к объектам с массой более 5×1020 кг и диаметром более 800 км»[5], однако это не вошло в окончательное решение 5A, которое было одобрено.
685 Планеты земной группы обладают высокой плотностью и состоят преимущественно из силикатов и металлического железа (в отличие от газовых планет и каменно-ледяных карликовых планет, объектов пояса Койпера и облака Оорта). Наибольшая планета земной группы — Земля — более чем в 14 раз уступает по массе наименее массивной газовой планете — Урану, но при этом примерно в 400 раз массивнее наибольшего известного объекта пояса Койпера.
686 Считается, что землеподобные планеты наиболее благоприятны для возникновения жизни, поэтому их поиск привлекает пристальное внимание общественности. Так в декабре 2005 года учёные из Института космических наук (Пасадена, Калифорния) сообщили ([1]) об обнаружении похожей на Солнце звезды, вокруг которой предположительно формируются скалистые планеты. В дальнейшем были обнаружены планеты, которые лишь в несколько раз массивнее Земли и, вероятно, должны иметь твёрдую поверхность.
687 Экзопланета (от др.-греч. exo — «вне, снаружи»; также экстрасолнечная планета от лат. extra — «вне, снаружи») — планета, обращающаяся вокруг звезды, отличной от Солнца, то есть не принадлежащая Солнечной системе. Планеты чрезвычайно малы и тусклы по сравнению со звёздами, а сами звёзды находятся крайне далеко от Солнца (ближайшая — на расстоянии 4,22 св. года — примерно 40 000 000 000 000 километров). Поэтому долгое время задача обнаружения планет возле других звёзд была неразрешимой. Сейчас такие планеты стали открывать благодаря усовершенствованным научным методам, зачастую на пределе их возможностей.
688 К концу февраля 2009 г. известно 342 экзопланеты в 290 планетных системах[1]. Подавляющее большинство из них обнаружено с использованием различных непрямых методик детектирования, а не визуального наблюдения. Большинство из известных экзопланет — газовые гиганты, и более походят на Юпитер, чем на Землю. Очевидно, это объясняется ограниченностью методов (легче обнаружить короткопериодичные массивные планеты).
689 Первые попытки найти планеты около других светил были связаны с наблюдениями за положением близких звезд. Еще в 1916 году Эдуард Бернард обнаружил красную звездочку, которая «быстро» смещалась по небу относительно других звезд. Астрономы окрестили ее Летящей звездой Барнарда. Это одна из ближайших к нам звёзд и по массе в семь раз меньше Солнца. Исходя из этого, влияние на нее планет, если они есть, должно было быть заметным. В начале 60-х годов XX века Питер Ван де Камп объявил, что открыл у неё спутник массой с Юпитер. Однако Дж. Гейтвуд в 1973 году выяснил, что звезда Барнарда движется без колебаний и, значит, массивных планет не имеет.
690 В конце 80-х годов ХХ столетия многие группы астрономов начали систематическое измерение скоростей ближайших к Солнцу звезд, ведя специальный поиск экзопланет с помощью высокоточных спектрометров.
691 Впервые сверхмассивная планета — коричневый карлик была найдена Д. Латамом в 1989 году около звезды HD 114762. Однако ее планетный статус был подтвержден только в 1999 году.
692 Понятно, что старания исследователей были направлены на поиск планет, подобных Земле. И вот в августе 2004 года была обнаружена первая такая планета, в системе звезды μ Жертвенника. Планета делает оборот вокруг светила за 9,55 суток, расстояние до звезды 0,09 а. е., температура на поверхности порядка 900 K. Масса её оценивается приблизительно в 14 масс Земли.
693 Астрометрический метод. Основан на изменении собственного движения звезды под гравитационным воздействием планеты. С помощью астрометрии были уточнены массы некоторых экзопланет, и открыты некоторые (Эпсилон Эридана b). Будущее этого метода связано с орбитальными миссиями, такими, как SIM.
694 Метод транзитной фотометрии, связан с прохождением планеты на фоне звезды. Позволяет определить размеры, а в сочетании с методом Доплера — плотности планет. Дает информацию о наличии и составе атмосферы.
695 Гравитационное линзирование. У этого метода крайне ограниченное применение, так как между наблюдаемой звёздной системой и Солнцем должна быть другая звезда, фокусирующая своим гравитационным полем свет наблюдаемой звёздной системы. Повторное наблюдение невозможно. Метод чувствителен к планетам с малой массой, вплоть до земной.
696 Спектрометрическое измерение радиальной скорости звёзд (метод Доплера). Это самый распространённый метод. С его помощью можно обнаружить планеты с массой не меньше нескольких масс Земли, расположенные в непосредственной близости от звезды и планеты-гиганта с периодами до ~10 лет. Планета, обращаясь вокруг звезды, как бы раскачивает её, и мы можем наблюдать доплеровское смещение спектра звезды.
697 Этот метод позволяет определить амплитуду колебаний радиальной скорости для пары «звезда - одиночная планета», массу звезды, период обращения, эксцентриситет и нижнюю границу значения массы экзопланеты ~M_j \sin \alpha. Угол ~\alpha между нормалью к орбитальной плоскости планеты и направлением на Землю современные методы измерить не позволяют.
698 Радиопоиск. Если вокруг пульсара вращаются планеты, то излучаемый сигнал имеет осциллирующий характер. Мощные направленные пучки излучения образуют в пространстве конические поверхности. Если на такой поверхности окажется Земля, тогда возможно зарегистрировать данное излучение.
699 Открытым экзопланетам в настоящее время присваиваются названия состоящие из названия звезды, около которой обращается планета, и дополнительной строчной буквы латинского алфавита, начиная с буквы «b» (например: 51 Пегаса b). Следующей планете присваивается буква «c», потом «d» и так далее по алфавиту. При этом буква «a» в названии не используется, так как такое название подразумевало бы собственно саму звезду. Кроме того, следует обратить внимание на то, что планетам присваиваются названия в порядке их открытия, а не по мере удаления от звезды обращения. То есть, планета «с» может быть ближе к звезде, чем планета «b», просто открыта она была позднее (как, например, в системе Глизе 876).
700 В названиях экзопланет существует исключение. Дело в том, что до открытия системы 51 Пегаса в 1995 г. экзопланеты называли иначе. Первые обнаруженные экзопланеты у пульсара PSR 1257+12 были названы прописными буквами PSR 1257+12 B и PSR 1257+12 C. Кроме того, после обнаружения новой, более близкой к звезде планеты, она была названа PSR 1257+12 A, а не D. Впоследствии эти планеты были переименованы во избежание путаницы в соответствии с современной системой именования экзопланет.
701  	Millonkahan nuotkin vaihtaa nimeä? em
702  	Oletko läski. Mä oon. Söin just äsken neljä
703 En vielä. (em)
704 Mut sata etunojapunnerrusta ja 15 leukaa menee. Kunhan aamuun ootellaan.
705 No oon. Sapuska on hyvää ja lihavat lepposia. em
706 tätä ei ole todistettu ... ehkä leppoisat luonteet ovat lihavia?
707 Ompaha, vai vedänkö turpaan :) em
708  	ei kai täällä ole niitä idiootteja jotka osallis
709 paremmin tulee rahaa kun börsästä
710  	G: Oletteko kohdanneet yliluonollisia tapahtumia.
711 joten johtopäätöksemme on, niitä ei ole.
712 Haaveilet siis edelleen siitä vappupiparista...?
713  	Määrittele "yliluonnollinen"
714 okainenhan sen määrittelee kohdallaan, mulle se on lähinnä tieteellisesti selittämätön tapahtuma.
715 kerro siis esimerkki tieteellisesti selittämättömästä tapauksesta. tai vaikka pari esimerkkiä.
716  	Älä älä. Mähän tässä kyselen;)
717 en tiedä yhtään tieteellisesti selittämätöntä asiaa.
718 Miksi sitten kulutit mun aikaani per.....
719 olen kiinnostunut yliluonnollisista asioista, siksi
720 itää, kun sen laittaa maahan ja kastelee.
721 Sit sitä pannaan juomaks joka pistää ihmisen yliluonnollisen paljon kastelemaan.
722 Kun juo litran kaljaa, niin kusee kaksi litraa. Mistä se kaljamaha vielä tulee?
723 Pitäs lirutella neljä mut värkit ei uso :) em
724 siinä seistiin me taas kusilaarilla hurraa hurraa hurraa ja hauskaa oli koko baarilla kusi tihkui kuin vanhalla vaarilla rostataa prostataa prosta-tatta-tatta-taa hurraa hurraa hurraa"
725 softanörtti saa iskettyä naisen ...
726  	Ai vit.... teitä:))))
727 ei siis mitään kosketusta todellisuuteen?
728 Usein jo kanssaihmisten typeryys on tasolla, jota ei voi tieteellä selittää.
729 Ei no oikeesti kai sitä törmäilee ennenminkin selittämättömiin.
730 Viimeinen tautiaalto tammi-helmikuussa 1920 oli erityisesti Lapissa kohtalokas. Pohjois-Lappi oli osittain säästynyt aiemmista influenssa-aalloista, mutta nyt tauti iski yhdellä kertaa sitäkin voimakkaammin. Lapissa kerrottiin taisteltavan elämästä ja kuolemasta. Inarin pitäjässä taudin raivo oli ilmeisesti pahin. Tautiin kuoli kahdessa kuukaudessa noin 200 henkeä, eli lähes 10 % väestöstä. Monista taloista olivat kaikki menehtyneet. Kuolleita löytyi sekä taloista että navetoista, joihin heikot olivat raahautuneet turvautuakseen eläinten lämpöön, kun eivät enää jaksaneet lämmittää huoneita. Monet menehtyivät talviteiden varsille, kun olivat lähteneet apua hakemaan.
731 Huonot alkuvuoden tulokset tarkoittavat sitä, että ensi keväänä osingot romahtavat.
732 Jotain kerran vuodessa tulevia 5% tuottoja? Mutkun toi 5% tulee joka päivä noususta... osingot EVVK :-)
732 olihan pari viikkoo sitten lama ja sikalenssukin meni heittämällä mitä vitun välii sillä on mitä ens vuonna tapahtuu 
733 pitäisiköhän jonkun vihjata konkarisalkunhoitajalle että kurssit tyypillisesti pohjaa 6-9kk ennenkuin tulokset...
734 ##### PANIIKKI KASVAA TA- MIESTEN LEIRISSÄ ##### Niin vaan kasvaa.
735 Metsä nousee M-real esimerkkinä! Vihdoinkin valoa?
736 ### HYVÄ JUMALA !! YIT PIAN 8 € !! ### NYT ON KIIRE OSTOKSILLE !!
737 bullerot ostaa ylös ja kohta taas saadaan paljon halvemmalla ;-)
738 nousu 98,6%, en ymmärrä, mikä nostaa
739 Vasta sitten,vasta sitten.....
740 jokaiseen nousuviestiinkö sinun pitää aina vastata. on paniikki hirmuinen. buauahahahaaaaaa.
741 Junastajäännin pelko on kyllä mahtava voima:
742 On se ....täälläkin. Pätee
742 Vasta kynpissä alkaa Yittu olla hankintahinnoissa. Tällä vauhdilla menee kesällä.
743 Kun jossain vaiheessa kertoilin että odotin kurssien laskua ja siksi olin lähes kokonaan kässinä, minulta aina täällä tivattiin miksi vain kässinä, mikset mene putteihin.
744 No jokos valkenee miksen, nytkin on kaiken järjen mukaan pelkkää syöksyä maailmassa, vaan pörssi tekee tälläviisiin... huomattavan tukalaa olisi nyt olal puttina.
745  	Eli, voishan sitä vieläkin huonommin mennä? :)
746 ja viikoksi tässä bullissa otin liki täyden osakepainon mutta menin sen pudottamaan jo takaisin 50/50 tilaan. Nyt 60/40 nousun myötä. 
747 si8otusperiaatteita ja -sääntöjä, joiden mukaan itseasiassa menee hyvin :)
748  	B&H -miehet pärjää indeksille ;) Menee ihan samaa tahtia.
749 Jopa voittaa, jos ei vertaile tuottoindekseihin :)
750 Voisi olla tilaisuus letkauttaa pääministeritason huumoria.Hän on saanut numeron 69.
751 taitaa olla niitä harvoja triblaajia vielä, vaikka paras nousu näillä nähdään varmaan nousukauden viimeisinä vuosina. Milloin Teleste taas yli 12€
752 kans tuossa salkun sisältöä kattellen teleste eniten miinuksilla vielä.
753 Apple nettoaa hyvin sovelluksista Ulkopuolisten kehittäjien tekeleistä 30 pinnaa.
754 huutaa, pitäisikö olla hiljaa vai onko tämä huutelu palstan sääntöjen mukaan edes pakollista ?
755 Tiedustele kässiukkojen fiiliksiä !! (em)
756 Ei no oikeesti kai sitä törmäilee ennenminkin selittämättömiin.
757 Turhan huutelijat ilmestyy aina nousu ja laskupiik eissä
758 Pelatkaa tänään pitkävetonne seuraavasti: Norja Kanada Yhteiskerroin 2,09 Olkaapa hyvät! JEK
759  	Ooostakaa, Oostakaa KAIKKI NOUSEE!
760 Muistatko myös 2008 helmikuun HYPEN opetuksen Myy jäävuoren huipulla,ja odota maltilla sen sulamista.
761 Totta hemmetissä tulee vielä karhu vastaan monta kertaa ennen vuoden vaihdetta, mutta sahaus näkyy menevän nyt oikeaan suuntaan, ja veikkaanpa että suunta jatkuu ylös myös lppuvuodesta, kun uutisointi ja ostohermoilu jatkuu tällaisena.
762 kuin nyt, silloin pössi eli kuplassa, nyt on täysin eri tilanne. Tosin varmasti nytkin jossain vaiheessa tulee pudotus, ei joka päivä voida nousta 5%, mutta siihen voi mennä aikaa...
763 Mulla alkaa olla parin kymppitonnin tili tästä lapusta :-)
764  	jaa taas siellä on ilmaista opt. b:tä en ala ite hakeen, salkussa ihan liian iso paino :-)))
765 Nyt kun Sopulilauman salkku on täytetty ja käteisvaranto lopussa,niin sopuli jää maltilla odottamaan myös Toukokuussa 100 % nousua...on ne veitikoita,on ne....
766 ja sitten tulee karhu ja syö nälkäänsä kaikki pienet sopulit. Sen pituinen se. :DDD
767  	AAA, bulleroa viedään taas kohti seinää tälläkin kertaa ilman kypärää
768 NOUSU KOPEAA !! VAURASTUMINEN NOPEAA !! KÄSSIUKKOJEN LEIPÄ KAPEAA !! HEI KÄSSIUKOT - IHAN TOSI - NOSTAKAA JO NAAMAT SIELTÄ SAVESTA ENNENKUIN MUUTUTTE FOSSIILEIKSI !!
769 Nonii, LAMA on virallisesti ohi... Jopa Honkarakenne lähtee :-)
770 kertokaa mikä nostaa rakennus alaa ? Miksi nokia ei nouse? Muuten salkku kilisee...
771 on jarrut päällä. Kukaan täällä pohjolassa usko nousuun enää.
772 No kunhan joelaiset otetaan mukaan messiin niin jo lähdetään taas.
773 Kun pojat on saanut hieman karkkirahaa :)
774 Monella vuoden paras tienaussesonki just takana, vappu ja tyhjät pullot.
775 Ne pelaavatkin OMALLA RAHALLA, toisin kuin jotkut muut pullistelijat (hymiö)
776 Taitaap enempi virtuaalipuolta kovimmillla pullis-telijoilla pelit olla.
777 kuppalehdellä on nettisijoittaja peli menossa siellä ne hillot taotaan tosin vitutus on aika iso kun oikeet pelit menee penkin alle 
778  	halvat laput on vähissä, mutta elisa on yksi... sellainen... ehdottomasti... sanoisin, että tähän tilanteeseen nähden ehkä heksin halvin lappu...
779 Nyt tehdään vain lisää sitä fyrkkaa. Ja näyttää tulevan ovista ja ikkunoista!
780 Tämä nousu tyssää kun jenkkipankkien stressitestit julkistetaan. Nyt on hyvä aika alkaa kerään kässiä kesäkuoppaa varten.
781 että hirveästi nuo tulokset heilauttavat, ainakaan alaspäin. Jenkit ovat jo toipumisen tiellä, stressitestit voidaan tunkea hanuriin.
782 Riitä 300-500 % osakekohtainen nousu 2:ssa kuukaudessa....Ne ahneet siat :D.
783 os joku on tullut vuodessa 100$ --> 1$, niin 1$-->3$ ei ole vielä kaksinen nousu, vaikka se prosenteissa mahtavaltä näyttääkin. Se, antaako yhtiöiden tila eväitä nousulle, on toki toinen kysymys, mutta jos lafkat välttävät konkan, niin kyllä noissa vielä tuota nousuvaraa piisaa...
784 Mikä indikoi toipumista jenkeissä? Ulkomaanvelat pitäsisi saada maksuun, nyt vaan tungetaan lisää valtion rahaa kituville pankeille. Taitaa käydä ennemmin niin, että talouden painopiste kääntyykin aasiaan tässä syklissä.
785 Eli jenkeillä pyyhitään ***settä kunhan talous toipuu
786  	euroopalla siinä sivussa
787 Taitaa Ramirenttukin nousta pian taas 20 euroon Varmaa ja riskitöntä tuottoa tiedossa +400%...:)
788 Älä ole turhan vaatimaton + 1000 % Ikuinen nousu alkoi FAKIIRIN mukaan....
789 valtionhallinnon uutta strategista kumppania... ostettu 7 kilua... keskihinnalla 10.17 Midas on jälleen koskettanut...
790  	Ei liikahda.. ...Ellut eikä Tellut mihinkään!?
791 Ja pari päivän päästä Nestekin on yli myyntihintasi vai ajattelitko saada vielä 8,5 eurolla?
792 huoli pois... sitä saa vielä alle ysin...
793 nessusta tuli 18 kiloo miinus verot tarkistuslaskennan jälkeen, joten tuon kanssa voipi elää... elisan tavoitehinnaksi annan 13.80 ja se pitäisi olla taulussa kesäkuussa... jos menee alle kympin, niin ostan lisää tätä valtionhallinnon uutta strategista kumppania...
794 No Elisa on minunkin viimeisin ostos salkkuun joten antaa nousta vaan. Ostohinta oli muuten jo lähes pari viikkoa sitten 10,13. Ei ole kaprinut, ei.
795 Osingot & Wärtsilä Jokohan myisi kevään osingot pois? Sijoitin ne Wärtsilään, ja osingoille on saanut tässä 2 viikon sisällä 25%:in lisätuoton.
796 Ajatus oli alunperin jättää ne käteiseksi, mutta onneksi ahneus voitti.
797 Mutta toisaalta taas Wärtsilä voi olla voittaja myös pitkällä juoksulla.....
798 Olen sanonut tämän jo ties kuinka monta kertaa, mutta kerrataan nyt vielä. Wärtsilää ei myydä. EI IKINÄ. Sitä vaan ostetaan. 
799  	Markkinataatut pikkulaput niitä pystyy varovaisesti ostelemaan, monissa ei takaajan lisäksi muita myyjiä edes ole, mutta takaaja myy kiltisti :-)
800  	Kiina määrää virkamiehet polttamaan paikallisia sa Lyhytaikaista elvytystä ja pitkäaikaista väestönsuunnittelua samaan aikaan. Kaikkea nämä Kiinalaiset keksivätkin.
801 Som du kunde läsa i förra inlägget så har jag bestämt mig för att göra något vettigt med denna sidan. 
802 Och när jag väl har bestämt mig för att göra något så har jag svårt att sluta.
803 Nu har jag bestämt mig för att satsa lite mer tid på den här sidan.
804 Jag kommer försöka uppdatera sidan minst en gång per vecka så kom gärna tillbaka och kika vad som händer.
805 Om du har tips &/ idéer så får du gärna lämna en kommentar.
806 Gott nytt år på alla forumsok.se användare!!!
807 Nu har jag låtit sidan vara igång under natten och det fungerar.
808 Hela 28 besök de senaste 24timmarna. Om jag hade känt mig tvungen att avge ett nyårslöfte så hade det varit att försöka öka mängden besökare.
809 Men nu verkar det iallafall fungera som det är tänkt, lämna gärna en kommentar om du vet något som kan förbättras.
810 Nästa steg är att implementera sökmotorn på ett bättre sätt och låta er användare lägga till egna sidor.
811 På grund av dåligt optimerad programvara bakom den tidigare version av Forumsok.se var jag tvungen att stänga sidan. Nu börjar optimeringen (och förändringarna) att bli klara.
812 Snart kommer du att kunna söka igenom svenska forum igen, med hjälp av Forumsok.se
813 Funderar du på att lämna Sverige för ett lite mer exotiskt resmål, men du vet inte vart du vill åka? 
814 Då har du kommit alldeles rätt.
815 Här på forumsok.se indexerar vi ju, som du säkert vet, en mängd olika forum, däribland reseforum.
816 Lycka till på UL idag och det kommer säkert gå bra . Jag känner också de flesta rörelserna långt ner, speciellt de första, nu känner jag iof lite överallt men inte ovanför naveln för livmodern räcker ju bara dit.
817 Alltså, tiden går så himla fort!, nästan skrämmande, är i v.22 nu.
818 Låter som du haft en riktigt härlig helg, skönt att få bli lite bortskämd med nya kläder och ny frisyr  .
819 ag har tagit bricanyl för första gången idag faktiskt. 
820 Hade riktigt ont efter att jag lämnat Colin på dagis och sammandragningarna ville inte ge sig. 
821 Nu är det snart en timme sen jag tog tabletten och sammandragningarna har lugnat sig och jag skakar som ett asplöv 
822 Ja det där med mycket flytningar är något jag upplevt båda graviditeterna. Trosskydd i storpack är det som gäller här iaf.
823 du skulle ju till bm o kolla blodtryck o värden o så pga din huvudvärk o sånt, hur gick de? Hittade inget när ja läste tillbaka lite.
824 Jag ska få en pojke!! 
825 Det är alldeles säkert bebisen jag kännt sa min BM för min moderkaka sitter i bakvägg och då känne rman lättare!!
826 Oh så skönt när nervositeten lagt sig!
827 Så underbart! Grattis till pojken dessutom!
828 Vad skönt att bricanylen hjälper iaf, det är trist att den ger sådna besvärliga skakningar bara. 
828 Det var också verkligen en härlig helg, känner mig som en ny utvilad människa full av tålamod och det är ju som du vet inte helt fel med ett yrväder hemma
829 Jo hehe förlåt vet inte om ja uppdaterade 
830 allt såg toppen bra ut, värderna hade gått ner lite mer sedan innan..
831 men dem sa att de va normalt tydligen, men jag tar iaf rtillrkotten av järnen så länge, för vara mer säker på att de inte beror på järn bristen osv...
832 men urinen var oxså jätte bra
834 men ja nojar över att magen inte växer redigt, vet de olika från person till person och vecka osv, men tycker att den inte ändrar sig, samt blir knappt hård 
835 hua stress i plugget nu innan man slutar.... hur mår du?
836 skönt, då kan du ju lägga oron om hf bakom dig nu, sen blir de ju tätare kontroller med o de är ju skönt..
837 Min mage har inte växt alls så mycket som jag hade förväntat mig, imorse efter ja kom hem o lämnat dottern va magen jätte liten tyckte jag.
838 Men de är ju så olika som du säger, inget konstigt lr nått att oroa sig för.
839 idag har sparkarna tagit helt ny form. Ja har ju sett lite utanpå o känt dom mer ordentligt sen vecka 17-18.
840 Nu är jag exakt 20 fulla idag och bebisen lever rövare, den trycker ut delar o magen ser helt rolig ut. Sparkar som en vilde
841 Spännande o läskigt på samma gång
842 Vet hur det är. Jag till och med SER hur magen går upp och ner i pulsens tackt!
843 Vid elva! Nervigt värre... Hur kände ni andra era första r örelser?
845 jag känner rätt långt ner, ligger den så långt ner liksom?
846 Jag har kännt rörelser länge och jag känner fortfarande av det till absolut största delen långt ner, de flesta sparkarna är vid symfysen.
847 Känner ibland lite längre upp men det är inte det vanliga. Är alldeles säkert ditt lilla pyre.
848 ja ett köns ul i göteborg blir det.. l'karen som gjorde rul försökte kolla men bebis låg inte stilla alls
849 jodå, jag har känt rörelserna långt ner, precis ovanför blygdbenet nästan. 
850 Men nu har de även börjat vandra lite uppåt, men livmodern har ju inte kommit längre än till naveln än så det ät ju fortfarande långt ner, brukar ligga runt mitt mellan benet och naveln ungefär.
851 och igår var det så mycket rörelser så jag fick vända på mig för att kunna somna. inte klokt vad det känns denna gången.
852 jag har oxå problem med det, inget roligt alls.
853 Dessutom så vekrar de som de börjar bli svårt o hålla tätt, pinsamt.
854 Jag tror iof de delvis beror på UVI, för de känns att jag har de ordentligt nu. 
855 Skönt att ja ska till bm om en vecka. Inte bara när ja nyser lr hostar nu, jätte jobbigt.
856 har den hemma sen ett tag tillbaka, men inte provat än, tror min mage behöver bli lite större för att den ska passa, men ska pröva ikväll så kan ja uppdatera om hur den satt o så
857 hej tjejer jag funderar på att vilja göra ett 3D ultraljud, i vilken veckan kan man göra det??
858 Lite när helst men vill. Men kan fortfarande kænna..
859 jag gjorde mitt i vecka 20, men tror de blir finar eo tydligare ansiktsdrag o så, senare i graviditeten..
860 ja skulle nog göra de runt vecka 26-28 kanske om ja skulle göra om de.
861 Jag med, det rinner massor ibland  Yss!
862 ja håret är ju underbart och går att göra så mycket med och det är roligt med allt man alla frisyrer/flätningar men dock mycket jobb, många tror ju afro är tåligare än nordiskt hår men det är snarare tvärtom man ska inte tvätta för ofta då torkar d ut sen att fläta gör så håret får vila från kammning osv då det sliter sen special shampoo och alla afro spray man ska ha i för håret inte ska va torrt haha ja det är en helt vetenskap man fått lära sig
863 Vad bra att du finns hær med erafrenhet, så får du læra mig sen..
864 Just kommit tillbaks från mitt RUL, allt såg bra ut, blev flyttad till den 5 oktober, så får vänta några dagar extra innan vi får träffa den lill*.
865 Den låg och visade upp sin profil så tydligt, sög lite på tummen och hade lite hicka! Så underbart att se!!!
866 Hej alla tjejer, är nu tillbaka i Skåneland efter en underbar helg i god vänners lag i huvudstaden.
867 Har klippt mig, känner mig rätt fin faktiskt, shoppat massor av kläder, varit på klubb (det var inte igår kan jag säga), sovit länge och njutit av lugnet Nu är det skönt att var hemma hos mannen och sonen igen, lillen är som ett frimärke och pussas och kramas och drar händerna genom håret, skönt att var efterlängtad
868 Kommenterar lite men glömmer väl de flesta eftersom det var några sidor att läsa ikapp
869 Vad positivt att ni träffats, håller nu tummarna för att någonting bra i någon form kommer ut av det.
870 Jag tycker att du har en alldeles fantastisk gravidmage och ser smal och smärt ut i övrigt så jag har svårt att förstå varifrån din systers kommentar kommer.
871 Lycka till på F.R idag, hoppas det blir konstruktivt.
872 Mycket fina, runda goa magar ni också  Och Pisces, grattis till killen även om det inte varnu du ville veta.
873 Håller tummarna för att läkarens helg varit bra så han är välvilligt inställd såhär på måndagen
874 Renoveringar, suck, varför dyker det alltid upp så mycket oväntade saker som man inte kunnat förutse, tror ibland att det är en oskriven lag.
875 Härligt att ha fått flytta in i lägenheten, det var den som krävdes för att du och killen ska kunna påbörja processen med asyl, var det inte så?
876 Och angående flytningar har jag också hur mycket som helst och som tur är gick de iaf över direkt efter förlossningen förra gången.
877 Hur går det med foglossning och sammandragningar, har du haft någon användning av bricanylen?
878 Tycker din mage är söt, skönt också att du inte känner dig störd över att den är liten utan glad över att du slipper gå och vara stor och tung länge, det är ju också den enda rimliga reaktionen egentligen men iaf jag brukar inte vara så rimlig när jag är gravid
879 Tycker allt i ditt resonemang kring din dotter och hennes biopappa verkar så klokt och genomtänkt, jag hoppas man kan se det från myndigheternas sida också.
880 Grattis till rörelser, visst blir man lycklig! Jag älskar varje liten kick lillebror ger mig
881 Så härligt med bröllop, tänker alltid på mitt eget när jag hör om andras.
882 Blää för att du inte fick HP  Ibland skulle jag vilja besöka huvudena på de som beslutar sånt, undrar hur de tänker?
883 Vilken fin bild från RUL:et, får mig att längta ännu mer efter september så vi får träffa våra små.
884 Har du hunnit få hem din baddrakt (från hm, den svarta) är så nyfiken på om den sitter bra, är ju rätt sugen på den själv.
885 Vi vill jättegärna se könet men det är inte huvudsaken, det jag är nervös för är att det inte ska stå rätt till. 
886 Har kännt något bubbel men det är mer som om någon pickar utanpå magen, inte inuti.
887 Kanske är det min egen puls som känns igenom?
888 Jag känner min puls jämt, både i fingrar och i magen, jättejobbigt. :) 
889 Klart vi håller tummarna, jag både hoppas och tror att det går alldeles utmärkt. När har ni tid?
890 Jag har haft det kanon fram tills idag. Haft ont i huvudet hela dagen, ont i øgonen och mått illa.
891 Hjælpte lite då jag sov en timme och sen gick ut en tur. 
892 Men kan fortfarande kænna..Nu har jag børjat få sura uppstøt och sånt också.. æckligt!!
893 Men annars 'ær allt kanon, ska inte klaga. Lillan sparkar och sparkar dær inne, Hærligt att kænna det ja. Då vet man att hon lever..
894 Oh vad jag længtar tills att jag får se henne..
895 Nu kanske jag ær æcklig hær.. Men ær det någon annan som har mycket flytningar?
896 d e lugnt vi alla e ju gravida i denna tråden...ja en del till å från har jag haft... ja visst e d underbart å få känna livet inom sig:=) jag längtar tills vi får veta könet den 22a juni:=)
897 ibland kan jag oxå få såna mass flytningar så det känns nästan som man kissar på sig eller som det är typ sperma som rinner ut.....
898 kunde inte sova inatt, hade så ont att jag inte hittade någon bra ställning att sova i och när jag väl slumrade till så vaknade jag att Skrutt sparkade osm bara den på blåsan så det var bara gå på toa vilket inte är det lättaste.
899 SÅ idag har jag skitit i min lägenhet och bara tagit det lugnt.
900 Är så nervös för att träffa läkaren imorgon, har träffat honom tidigare och det var även han som gjorde de 2 första vul och jag gick till honom första gången jag började känna av foglossningen men då had ejag inte lika ont och han tyckte då att jag skulle gå promenader, när man har foglossning så ska man vila så mycket som möjligt sa den andra läkaren jag var hos.
901 28. mrtsil 2009.a sndis kennelisse esimene pesakond pekingi koera kutsikaid. Pesakonnas on neli kutsikat - kaks poissi ja kaks tdrukut
902 Lyssile palju piima ja pereõhvale kannatust ja judu! 
903 Palju nne ka meie poolt! aBlüemetje lik LOVEYOU 
904 Palju nne ja tervist nii emõle kui ka lastele! Palju ilusaid pilte, nagu Sirjel alati, on siin 
905 Oi, kui ilõs kevade algu! Palju-palju nne esimese pesakonna puhul! LOVEYOU 
906 Palju õnne, kutsikad juba kuused!
907 Täna, st 28.04.2009.a, said meie kutsikad ühe kuuseks! Foorumisse endasse ei osanud pilte lisada. 
908 Püüan nüüd panna paar pilti meie sünnipäevalastest .... kõik kutsikad koos
909 Kasvage mõnusateks karvakeradeks!
910 Väga armsad pisipõnnid! Valge laiguga poiss on minu lemmik, tal on kohe selline väga muhe nägu peas =) 
911 See põnn on üks minu lemmikutest
912 Oi kui ilus, sinetab kõik ja kõige krooniks veel pekingid 
913 hmm..peab vist nädalavahetusel ka fotoka ja kõertega metsa minema
914 vat kus pildid tulevad ja ehk nüüd meelitame ka teisi oma lemmikutega loodusesse minema.....
915 Kevad on ju looduses tärkamise aeg ja meie karvased sõbrad saavad ka looduses jalutada ja nautida......
916 Jätkuvalt mõnusat looduses viibimist! Ja ära unusta fotokat kaasa võtmast!
917 Pärli leidis lille! Nii ilus asi peab ju sõõdav olema! 
918 Tedmiseks veel, kõiki pilte saab ka hinnata
919 kui pilt meeldib, vajutate rohelisele nupule, kus näitab pöial üles ja kui ei meeldi, siis punane pöial alla, need on iga foto  ( ja ka kirjutise) kohal paremal pool , selle roosakaspunase riba sees Kõik hääletama! 
920 Vaatasin vanu pilte ja leidsin hulga toredaid pilte, siin üks Eela pilt Bossust ja Mummust maikuus aastal 200
921 Käesoleva dokumendi eesmärgiks on anda praktilisi juhiseid antisemitismi juhtumite kindlaksmääramiseks, andmete kogumiseks ning antisemitismi käsitlevate õigusaktide rakendamiseks ja jõustamiseks. 
922 Antisemitism kujutab endast teatud ettekujutust juutidest, mis võib väljenduda juutide vihkamises.
923 Antisemitismi sõnalised ja füüsilised väljendused on suunatud juudi või mittejuudi soost inimeste  ja/või nende vara vastu; juudi kogukonna institutsioonide ja usuliste rajatiste vastu
924 Lisaks võivad niisugused avaldused olla suunatud juudi ühtsuse sümboliks peetava Iisraeli riigi vastu.
925 Antisemitism süüdistab tihti juute konspiratiivses käitumises inimkonnale kahju tekitamiseks ning teda kasutatakse sageli juutide süüdistamiseks põhjustes “miks asjad viltu lähevad”.
926 See väljendub kõnes, kirjatekstides, nähtavates kujundites ja tegevustes ning tugineb pahatahtliku iseloomuga stereotüüpidele ning negatiivsetele isikuomadustele.
927 Avalikus elus, meedias, koolis, töökohtadel ning ususfääris kohatavad antisemitismi näited võiksid üldist konteksti arvestades sisaldada alljärgnevat, olemata samas piiratud ainult nendega
928 Radikaalsest ideoloogiast või usu suhtes omatavatest ekstremistlikest vaadetest lähtudes üles kutsumine juute tapma või neile kahju tekitama, sellele kaasaaitamine ja selle õigustamine
929 Valelike, ebainimlikkusele ja deemonlikkusele viitavate või stereotüüpsetele arusaamadele tuginevate väidete esitamine juutide kohta või juudi kogukonna kui terviku kohta
930 näiteks nagu müüt juutide ülemaailmsest vandenõust või meedia, majanduse, valitsusasutuste või muude ühiskonna institutsioonide juutide kontrolli all olemise kohta.
931 Juutide kui rahva süüdistamine selles, et nad kannavad vastutust tegelike või väljamõeldud pahategude eest
932 mida on saatnud korda kas üks juudi soost inimene või inimeste rühm, või isegi asjade eest, mida panid toime mittejuudi soost inimesed.
933 Teise maailmasõja ajal natsionaalsotsialistliku Saksamaa, tema toetajate ja kaasosaliste toimepandud juudi rahva genotsiidi kui fakti, selle ulatuse, kasutatud vahendite (näit gaasikambrid) eitamine (Holokaust).
934 Juudi rahva ja Iisraeli riigi süüdistamine Holokausti väljamõtlemises ja võimendamises.
935 Juudi kodanike süüdistamine selles, et nad ilmutavad suuremat ustavust Iisraeli või juutide väidetavate ülemaailmsete prioriteetide kui konkreetse riigi enda huvide suhtes.
936 Näited selle kohta, kuidas antisemitism avaldub Iisraeli kui riigi suhtes,  arvestades seejuures üldist konteksti, võiksid sisaldada alljärgnevat: 
937 Juudi rahva ilmajätmine enesemääramise õigusest, näiteks väites, et Iisraeli riik eksisteerib rassistlike jõupingutuste tulemusena.
938 Topeltstandardite kasutamine, kus Iisraelilt nõutakse sellist käitumist, mida ei eeldata ega nõuta üheltki teiselt demokraatlikult riigilt.
939 Klassikalise antisemitismiga seotud sümbolite ja kuvandite kasutamine (näiteks väited Jeesuse tapmise kohta juutide poolt või verepatt) Iisraeli ja iisraellaste kirjeldamiseks.
940 Kaasaegse Iisraeli poliitika võrdlemine natsipoliitikaga.
941 Juutidele kollektiivse vastutuse panemine Iisraeli riigi kordasaadetud tegude eest.
942 Iisraeli aadressil tehtavat kriitikat, mis sarnaneb mis tahes muu riigi suhtes tehtava kriitikaga, ei saa pidada antisemitistlikuks.
943 Antisemitistlikud teod on kuritegelikud, kui seadus neid nii määratleb (näiteks Holokausti eitamine või antisemitistlike materjalide levitamine mõnedes riikides). 
944 Kuriteod on antisemitistlikud,  kui rünnaku sihtmärgid, kas inimesed või vara – näiteks nagu ehitised, 
945 koolid, kultusekohad või surnuaiad – valitakse välja seetõttu, et neid peetakse juudi kultuuri osaks või nad on seotud juutidega. 
946 Antisemitistlik diskrimineerimine on juutide ilmajätmine võimalustest või teenustest, mis on kättesaadavad teistele  ning seda peetakse paljudes riikides ebaseaduslikuks. 
947 aga ma tahtsin lihtsalt öelda, et eks see KKK (koolita kristlast kirvega) käib umbes samamoodi nagu kristlased möögaga eestlast taarausust ristiusku pöörasid...
948 Ma lugesin kohani, kus küsilause lõpus oli hüüumärk. Edasi ei olnud mõtet. 
949 "Väga hea tekst" muideks Metsatöll on tegüja! 
950 Usk on igaühe oma asi ja mida-keda keegi kummardab mind ei häiri.
951 Aga sellised tegelased, selline maneer ja "argumentatsioon" on ju küll vähe madalalaubaline ja õõvastav. Palvetava memme vastu on retspekts, räuskava fundamentalistinäru vastu küll mitte, öäk. Neil on kõik saatanast, matsid sihuksed.
952 Eh. See tüüp on täielik geenius. Soovitan sealset foorumit rohkem lugeda ning selles veenduda... ja kui julgust ka võite sõna sekka öelda. Päris toredat nalja saab.
953 Meenutab täiesti paranoilist ning ülekamminud amfetamiinisõltlast kes näeb absoluutselt kõiges ja kõigis vaenlast ning ohtu. 
954 ahnoh ma isegi ühes punktis natukene nõustun võinoh ma ise ka väga sellist vägivaldset muusikat ei taha kuulata.. 
955 anoh crusoe on ju legend, suht mõttetu üritada teda mõista .. 
956 Haha, kuld. See foorum on muidu tore jah. Käin nii kord nädalas seda lugemas. 
957 Mul jäi silm peale hoopis bännerile "Pornograafia". Pidin pettõma. 
958 mul läks õlu (hinge?)kurku : )
959 Päris tore. Sundisin end ja lugesin ikka lõpuni. Issanda loomaaed on ikka suur ja lai. 
960 Kirikute Nõukogu võiks hakata tegelema KA ASJAGA ja sellised avaliku vaenu levitajad seadusesilma ette tirida.
961 Kus on Eesti Kirikute Nõkogu SILMAD
962 Oh, sama siin. Saab nõtuke nalja vähemalt. 
963 paras huumorisait on, leidsin ühe huvitava artikli 
964 üks mu lemmik foorumeid. alati on sealt midagi lugeda. 
965 See on jah nalja täis foorum. See Crusoe on seal alati möllanud. Huvitav, kui vana see tüüp on?
966 Tundub üsna noor olevat teine (ei pääsegi veel niipea oma jumala juurde) Kui Google'ist natuke otsida siis tuleb välja, et Crusoe = pastor nimega Antti Loodus
967 no tegelikult on tegemist Metsatölli põgusa fänniga, kes nüüd teeb neile ka reklaami kristlikes foorumites! Nagu te ka näete on laulude sõnade aadressid pandud jne
968 tegin nii andeka nalja, et ise ka ei üsu. ning kui keegi aru ei saa on mul kurb.
969 1978. aasta novembris vapustas maailma uudis usklike massisuitsiidist Guajaana džunglites. Üle 900 Jim Jonesi Rahva Templi kiriku liikme – mehed, naised, lapsed, vanurid – sooritas enesetapu oma hullumeelsusest vaevatud usujuhi õhutusel, kelle jaoks see oli ebainimliku maailma vastu suunatud "revolutsiooniline tegu". Karismaatiliste jutlustaja- ja juhiomadustega Jim Jones oli oma kiriku liikmed toonud Guajaanasse USAst, et rajada keset troopikat unistuste ühiskond, Jonestown. Nagu paljud utoopiad lõppes ka Jonestown katastroofiga.
970 Ohtrad dokumentaalkaadrid Jim Jonesist ja tema järgijate igapäevaelust, mis on põimitud nii ellujäänute kui ka hukkunute sugulaste meenutustega annavad tulemuseks tähelepanuväärse dokumentaali ühe usuliikumise dünaamikast. Teisalt osutab film aga ohtudele, mis võivad kaasneda kui karismaatilise juhi tegelikkuse tajumine moondub, kuid tema mõju oma järgijate üle püsib. Sellised ohud ei puuduta aga mitte ainult religiooni- ja usuvaldkonda.
971 Orkutis on mul ja pastor Anttil ühine tuttav, ploorumlane naine. 
972 Usule ja riigikorrale suunatud mõtlemine on küll lihtne ja väga efektiivne moodus rahva kontrollimiseks, aga selle maksumus on väga kallis: kultuuri ja tehnoloogia mahajäämus, kuna lihtsalt puuduvad oma peaga mõtlevad inimesed. Arvestades viimasel ajal üha kiirenevat tehnoloogia arengut:
973 on niisugusel teguviisil riigi jaoks pikemas plaanis hävitavad tagajärjed tehnoloogilise mahajäämuse tõttu. 
974 Ma ei ütleks, et "hävitavad tagajärjed". Nt. Iraak ja Iraan ei hävine mitte. Iraan teeb edukalt tuumareaktorit ja Iraagis pole USA mingit edu saavutanud, pigem on see sõda venima jäänud. Usk aitab iraaklasi võitluses agressoriga ühte liita.
975 Vastupidine tulemus ootab valget inimest, kes ei usu, tegeleb vaid lõbustustega, seadustab isegi samasooliste abielud ja lubab narkootikume kasutada.
976 Igasugused vähemused aitavad killustada ühtse riigi. Nagu luik, haug ja vähk. See demokraatia on vaid niikaua hea, kui pole vaja end kaitsta välisvaenlase eest.
977 Ei hakka uut teemat tegema, kuid usun, et paljud tunnevad rõõmu R.Crusoe blogi üle! Lunastus läbi klikkimise
978 jeesustreff oli tore aga ajad on muutunud ja see ajaveeb teeb kurvaks. 
979 Põlema. See möga seal saidil. 
980 Minu meelest on seal blogis tema kirjutamisstiil võrdlemisi sarnane foorumikasutaja Vilbiksi omale. Hea küll, Crusoe on grammatiliselt puhtam, aga väljendusvõtted on samad. 
981 Soovisin siia teemasse pildimaterjali kopeerida, kuid Jeesus valdab koodi! 
982 Kulla Anarchy, on asju mille kohta kas pole võimalik või on mõttetu kontsruktiivsust rakendada. Vabandust, mul pole ka psühhiaatri haridust et seda seal lahata.
983 Ja samas on huvitav, et kui ma siinsamas foorumis vähemate idiootidega olen pikalt üritanud konstruktiivselt arutleda, olen saanud nega ja sõimu et tegelen mõttetusega.
984 Sel kodanikul lisaks veel caps. Karjub kõrva.
985 See piff näeb välja nagu ta oleks ühe jämeda pläru kanepit teinud, see seal süütuse pildil. 
986 Mida eelistaksid tarbijaveebi nimena? Veeb on mõeldud eelkõige tavalisele linlasele, kes külastab supermarketeid ning ei tarbi kuigi teadlikult.
987 Roheline24.ee on reklaamibüroo poolt pakutud tööversioon, mille paneme veebile nimeks siis, kui liikmetelt paremaid nimesid ei laeku. Milliseid mõtteid tekitavad sinus nii veebi nime praegune tööversioon kui teiste väljapakutud nimed?
988 Tekstid on veebilehel laiali pilltutatud. Kas erinevate teemade kaupa ei saaks kuidagi neid selgemini grupeerida?
989 "Tarbimisjuhised" ja "ostuvõimalused" - millist infot nende linkide alt pakutakse ... kõlavad iseenesest veidralt.
990 Allpool mõned nimevariandid, mida vanas rikkiläinud foorumis kunagi uuele tarbimisveebile pakuti:
991 Järjekordne ***24.ee kloon oleks tõepoolest äärmiselt nyri, samuti ei ytle see midagi asja sisu kohta. 
992 Niisugusi ettepanekuid tegev reklaamibyroo ei olnud ilmselt kõige parem valik. 
993 Mõni "tarktarbija" laadne nimi ajab ehk asja ära, kui keegi midagi säravamat ei paku. "Hooli" jms lähevad jälle ebamääraseks
994 Me isegi kodus arutasime väga pikalt, et teha analoogne sait, kus on info kirbuturgudest, kus saab ise kaupa tasuta ärajagada-arvutid, külmkapid, vaibad jne.
995 kus oleks ka bännerid ökokauplustega ja fotod slaidiriba taaskasutuskeskustesse toodud korralikumatets asjadest-(kohalikud õpilaste fotoringid oleks tõenäolislet vabatahtlikud)kus saab ka registreeruda maakonna piires ennast autojuhiks või kaassõitjaks. 
996 Ütleme, et ülenurme vallast tuleb igapäeva 4 inimest tööle, nad kõik ei pea eraldi autodega sõitrma vaid lähevad iga päev kordamööda kellegi autoga jne
997 asjade ärajagamiseks mõtlesime keskkonna kus piirkonna kaupa saab jagada mööblit ja registreerunud kasutaja saab ise panna enda kuulutusele märgi külge, kui kaup on leidnud uue omaniku.
998 aitan hea meelega kaasa, sisehaldussüsteem peaks hästi kerge olema ja ma peaksin saama vaida piirkonda nt Tartu või Põlva jne.
999 Tere, Ma arvan, et küsimus ei ole mitte niivõrd veebis endas, kuivõrd selles, kelleni see jõuab. 
000 Nt. mina tean täiesti vabalt oma võimalusi mahedalt tarbida ja arvatavasti seda portaali ei kasutaks.
001 Hallo, ich bin verheiratet und will es auch weiterhin bleiben. Ich suche auf deisem Wege eine aufgeschlossene SIE für eine diskrete Affäre.Liebe Grüße, J.
002 ich bin demnächst wieder in A. Wie wäre es mit einem Kaffee am Kuhsee?
003 Gerne, ruf mich an, wenn Du da bist. Meine Handynummer hast Du ja noch. Bis denn, J.
004 Suche Seitensprung in Augsburg mit einer jüngeren. Bib 50 aber noch sehr gut drauf.Interesse dann
005 Echt genial...was is, wenn deine Frau online is?? Dann liest sie das, find ich nich so clever...du musst einfach in ne Schule gehen, nen 50 €-Schein hochheben und schon sammeln sich die ganzen Schlampen um dich...
006 suche eine Sie für schöne Stunden,bin zu allem bereit.
007 es ist doch so dämlich wenn man sich verheiratet und da noch im internet wo jeder jeder finden und sehen kann nach nem seitensprung zu suchen. für was heiratet ihr denn dann überhaupt?
008 und ich gebe thomas recht. deine frau kann das hier doch wohl auch lesen und wenn sie nicht dann ihre freunde oder sonst wer. du solltest das nicht vergessen.
009 Mögen Sie Nutella? Dann kaufen Sie sich einen Schrank!
010 Aus welchem Grund haste dann überhaupt geheiratet? Liebe und Treue bis der Tod euch trennt? Ich hoffe deine Frau sieht das hier alles und erkennt dich! Schäm dich!
011 dann kannst ja gleich in der zeitung ne annonce schalten von wegen frau betrügen. 
012 Mögen Sie Nutella? Dann kaufen Sie sich einen Schrank!
013 Was bist DU den für ein krankes Hirn!!!
014 sei froh das es nur ein comic ist...ich finds auch krank...aber muss ja auch sólche geben. 
015 es zählt nur der spaß am sex. gerne erfüll ich dir deine geheimen wünsche oder bist du neugierig und möchtest mal etwas ausprobieren was du dich sonst nicht traust. oder hast du ein fetisch.
016 egal was es ist, bei mir kannst du ohne scham und ohne bedenken, alles ausprobieren, was immer du auch willst. ich habe keine tabus, lerne selber gern dazu, probiere super gern viel aus und teste mit dir alles was du möchtest.
017 natürlich kannst du auch ganz normalen , aber guten sex bekommen. 
018 sag mir deine wünsche, neigungen oder bedürfnisse und vorallem genau was du suchst. aussagekräftiges bild wäre nett, aber kein muß. gepflegt und diskretion = selbstverständlich.
019 was geht denn hier ab,gibt es in augsburg keine treuen und normale menschen? aus mein schatz!! 
020 wieso ist man denn für dich nicht normal, wenn man spaß oder ein abenteuer sucht.
021 trotz neigungen, kann man lieb sein und einen partner haben,wenn es beide ausleben. weis nicht warum solche wie du sich immer an sowas anstoßen. naja egal.
022 schreibt mich an, wenn ihr nicht immer nur den standart im leben wollt.
023 wenn es für beide partner okay ist,ist das schon in ordnung.jeder wie er es braucht!aber wenn man sein partner betrügt, find ich das nicht mehr so toll!
024 ja, dass ist ja wieder was anderes, betrügen und jemanden hintergehen, egal ob beim sex, geld oder freundschaft, ist immer ***. dass sehe ich auch so.
025 es hat sich nur so angehört, auch von den anderen, dass die welt zusammen bricht, wenn man hier eine nette sie zum zwitschern oder zu sonst was sucht.
026 deshalb hab ich auch geschrieben, weil ich finde das ich relativ normal bin, nur eben mit lust am ausleben meiner sexuallität. bin halt gut im bett, kann doch auch nichts dafür. hab lange trainiert *gg* (für die miesmuscheln hier..-> das war ein spaß)
027 ps. viele hier würden gern mal probieren und es tun, trauen sich aber nicht, weil sie angst haben dass sie ihre derweilige beziehung sonst zerstören, das finde ich zum beispiel auch schade und muß sagen.
028 liebe ist liebe und sex ausleben ist sex ausleben. warum eigendlich nicht ? wenn man spaß dran hat sollte man es tun, mit 80 jahren wirds schwierig :o))))
029 ich finde das sex und liebe zusammen gehören. das eine ohne das andere geht gar nicht klar. aber manche können das ja trennen!
030 danke , dir auch viel glück in deinem liebes-traum :
031 echt ne erst jammern die männer weil ihnen die eigene frau net gut genug ist und dann wundern sie sich wenn die ihnen fremd geht. schämt euch ihr ekelhaften männer....
032 dann könnt ihr ja gleich als ons-singles rumziehen anstatt die frauen zu verarschen...ich hoffe jede einzelne kriegt das mit und keine will euch haben....
033 was laberst denn du da für nen daten-müll.
034 wenn die männer jammern und die frauen fremd gehen sind die männer schuld ?
035 wer das nicht kann und tut ist selber schuld. und wenn man das nicht vorher klärt bevor man was eingeht, dann auch.
036 mit dem richtigen partner oder partnerin an der seite sind solche sachen kein problem. 
037 das meinte ich überhaupt nicht. doch es gibt viele männer die machens mit jeder frau und wundern sich dann wenn ihre dame es zb aus rache auch mit nem anderen macht. ich finde es eh schäbig denn für sowas braucht man keinen partner
038 nee für sowas braucht man keinen partner da hast du recht, aber auch die vernachlässigte frau hat recht darauf, immer her damit ich bin dabei
039 hehe naja such dir lieber ne single frau:D hehe da müsst ihr euch beide keine sorgen machen:D 
040 ja ist ja eigendlich auch egal ob single frau oder vergeben, nett sollte sie sein und lust sollte sie mitbringen. es muß ja nicht immer körperlich sein, es gibt ja web cam auch noch:o))))
041 ich hab nen freund:D hehe ansonsten würde es nicht gerade meiner meinung oder einstellung entsprechen sowas gleich zu machen weil man ja auch nicht jedem vertrauen kann.
042 sowas mache ich nur wenn ich jemanden besser kenne. also camen 
043 kennenlernen kann man sich ja immer und überall :O) woher kommst du eigendlich.
044 warum denken frauen eigendlich immer so kompliziert ? die frage interessiert mich wirklich mal sehr 
045 wir denken nicht kompliziert sonder nur anderst. außerdem kommt es immer auf die person an:) für uns frauen sind männer teilweise auch mythen...so ist es ja nicht:)
046 ja da stimm ich dir zu, da haste wohl recht. 
047 ach ja und frauen haben immer recht;) hehe scherzle 
048 naja nicht immer, aber schon sehr viel das muß ich zugeben aber männer sind besser im bett
049 Ja klar von wegen, das kann man gar nicht behaupten das Männer besser sind es kommt auf die Praktiken an!
050 achja das kann jeder sagen, beweis es mir doch mal
051 Sorry aber an verh. Männer geh ich nicht ran, vor allem wenn die kein NEIN verstehen können wie ich es Dir per Mail schon mitgeteilt habe!
052 bist du auch eine die immer gern recht hat ? also ich schon *ggg* besonders wenn die einfälle von mir kommen
053 nene ich bin net so und ich bin bestimmt net schlechter als du im bett aber ich werde es nicht beweisen. nur meinem freund
054 also das du nicht schlechter bist als ich im bett, des glaub ich dir gern und das du es mir nicht beweisen willst , weil du es nur deinem freund besorgst, dass akzeptiere ich natürlich voll und ganz, ist doch klar, find ich auch gut, muß ja nicht jeder so ein sex-monster sein wie ich *ggggg* *spaß*
055 also bei dir möcht ich gern mal mäuschen sein, das wäre super interessant bestimmt
056 aber mach dir nichts drauss, du bist echt in ordnung, so wie ich des einschätze
057 wenn alle gleich wären, dann wäre es ja außerdem schon wieder langweilig. is schon gut so wie es ist. 
058 aber trotzeem sind die frauen bzw, viele frauen heut zu tage, viel zu verschlossen und zu brav, will ja nicht sagen langweilig. aber dazu zähle ich dich jetzt nicht, also fühl dich nicht angesprochen. ich mein die anderen frauen in augsburg
059 liebe grüße....augsburger77 das kleine sex-monster von nebenan
060 ich hab nie behauptet kein sexmonster zu sein;) hehe scherzle
061 hm du könntest ne spinne sein davon haben wir hier ein paar;) aber interessant wäre es aufjeden fall denke ich;) ne also langweilig ist es net und ich versteh auch net das es manchmal so wird. wenn man net immer des selbe macht ist es super. und naja ich hab ja noch nichts mit augsburger frauen gehabt:) aber die männer hier strengen sich sehr an *G*
062 außerdem wenn ich ne spinne wäre,dann würden ja alle frauen von mir weglaufen und das is doch auch nicht schön
063 aber irgendwie langweilig und oft verklemmt sind se trotzdem
064 da bin ich genau wie du, ich probier auch immer wieder neues aus. 
065 oooh bitte:) hehe ne du manche typen versuchens stundenlang :) aber in meiner "schwarzen liste" fühlen sie sich wohl;) hehe.
066 hm also ich habe jetzt aus anderen städten ganz andere frauen erlebt:) die verwundern mich immer wieder:D hehe
067 außerdem such ich immernoch nach ner lieben sie, aber es scheint echt keine zu geben, die mehr drauf hat, also nur langweilig zu sein
068 nähe stadtmitte:) du? ach komm hier gibts bestimmt noch interessante mädels:D hehe du armes monster du;) 
069 ja mädels gibts genug, aber gibts auch richtige frauen
070 Naja, denkst Du das Frauen viel besser sind? Du kannst das doch nicht nur auf Männer beziehen. Ich habe sehr viele Frauen kennen gelernt die es genauso machen.
071 Nur sind Frauen ein wenig schlauer, und hängen es nicht an die große Glocke. Ich habe ja schon fast das Vertrauen in die "brave" Frauenwelt verloren
072 Ich habe die erfahrung gemacht, das Frauen auch nicht besser sind, und am schlimmsten waren die, die immer gesagt haben: " So etwas würde ich nie machen".
073 Ja, wirklich, das waren die schlimmsten und die waren alle verheiratet.
074 Nunja, es gibt aber auch sicherlich noch andere Beweggründe. Ich will hier ja nicht ins Detail gehen, oder das Fremdgehen für gut heißen, aber schon mal überlegt, das sich im lauf der Jahre auch was ändert?
075 Übrigens gibt es mehr als genug Frauen, die von Ihren Männern vernachlässigt werden. Ich glaube nicht, das es für jemanden der danach auf der suche ist, schwer ist solche zu finden.
076 Aus Spaß wurde Ernst, und Ernst ist heute drei Jahre alt.
077 es gibt genug frauen die vernachlässigt werden, weil der mann keine zeit hat oder keine lust mehr hat oder sonst aus irgendwelchen gründen.
078 aber es ist schwer, vernachlässigte frauen zu finden, die dies entweder zugeben oder in vollen zügen sich ausleben trauen. und vorallem die dann auch noch so sind, wie *Mann* sie sucht.
079 viele sind schon so unterdrückt, vernachlässigt, verbort oder sie trauen sich nicht, weil sie von der masse als böse frauen dargestellt werden.
080 sie trauen sich erst garnicht etwas einzugehen obwohl es ihnen eigendlich gut tun würde.
081 und das ist schade, denn ob mann oder frau, jeder hat das recht seinen sex in vollen zügen auszuleben.
082 Ich glaube eher, das man Sie findet, wenn man nicht danach sucht. Ich habe die erfahrung eigentlich nur gemacht, weil ich ein guter zuhörer bin.
083 Das ist nämlich das eigentlich was den meisten Frauen fehlt. 
084 ich hab doch meinen speck schon gefunden;) ich zier mich doch net:D hehe aber manche hier sind echt dumm und lassen sich net abweisen und das kotzt irgendwann sowas von an
085 also bei mir hast kein speck, da hast nur einen rießen muskel unter halb des bauchnabels *gggg* ferkel sagt , die zu mir, wo gibts denn sowas
086 außerdem lass ich mich doch von dir auch nicht abweisen, mich hast doch auch an der backe kleben wie ne zecke
087 ja du bist auch ein ferkel ha ich hatte noch nie ne zecke;)
088 klaro bin ich auch ein ferkel, sehr gern sogar
089 indem wir uns treffen und ich dich verwöhne. daran kannst du beweisen, ob dich zierst oder doch nicht, wie du ja behauptest  
090 hab ich dich verzaubert?;) hehe scherrrzle ich bin ja net so wirklich nett ;) *gähn* ich ziehr mich dooch netta
091 ich find dich schon nett und schlechte tage hat doch ein jeder.
092 mei guck ne so lieb:D hehe wie hab ich das gemacht ? bin keine zauberin
093 das weis ich auch nicht wie ihr frauen das immer wieder schafft 
094 ich wills auch nicht wissen, sonst ist ja das frauen geheimniss gelüftet und das wäre ja langweilig für euch 
095 also ich mag motorräder und autos und hab auch fast beide führerscheine. ich liebe geschwindigkeiten. 
096 ich hab nie kopfweh beim sex im gegenteil ich bin eher die schlimmere. ich hab mich beim barras beworben. 
097 ich raufe mich ohne über einen abgebrochenen fingernagel zu heulen. ich höre rockmusik uuuuund jetzt muss ich mich leider beeilen weil ich pizza essen will
098 schreib mich mal im profil an......da ist rüber will ich mich intensiever unterhalten
099 ja wie soll ich dir antworten wenn du moch *blockst* du schlaumeier 
100 m dann musst mich mal doof angemacht haben^^ hehe mom ich machs rückgängig und jetzt 
101 We're going to be organizing a Joomla conference this summer in New York (Manhattan) and I thought to start the thread and feel out whether people think the end of June would work for them.
102 We're definitely planning on starting a user group here - so I'm more than happy to volunteer my help in that regard. Feel free to PM me for details, maybe we can combine our efforts?
103 who is we?
104 people in the area?
105 The reason i ask is because there is an events teamand a charter to be followed for joomlaevents
106 That is *way cool.* Thanks for taking the initiative to get the word out in NYC about Joomla!. The two of you will be a great team! Two of my most favorite J! people. Manhattan. Joomla!. Perfect!
107 I'd love to be there, too. I love Manhattan. And June is a great time to be there, too. But, Louis says we have to be "in the area" so, Nebraskans are probably out. That's probably best for Manhattan
108 s Brian pointed out correctly the term "Joomla! conference" or "Joomla!Day" are protected names and if you like to do something like that you need to request this officially by me.
109 Best you send me a mail with your details and I send you the charter document.
110 I personally would argue that "conference" might not be the right term for the usage as this is something which really something that is going to be organised by the core team and there we might have an issue with the naming.
111 I suggest you name it a New York Joomla!Day as this allows you to have a conference style as well.
112 Sorry for being peeky about the names, but we need to watch those things.
113 Cheers and looking forward to reading your application
114 Joomlashack would help out in any role needed, whether its a conference, J day, beer up, whatever
115 I'm new to Joomla and would love to attend the conference.
116 Also, if anyone would be interested in gettting together to discuss Joomla before then, similar to the metups that occur all over the city, we could do that too.
117 I added the event to our list. As soon as there are dates or anything else to report I would love to see it in this thread.
118 I'd be glad to help out as well.  I enjoy any reason to get into the city which doesn't involve a Broadway show.
119 I'm a Montreal Joomla! user (and Joomlashack customer  ;) @ Barrie) that might be interested in attending the NYC Joomla!Day. Sounds like it could be a pretty cool bike ride south of the border so if anyone from the area reads this post and thinks it might just be a plan, drop me a message
120 As far as the dates are concerned, I already have a ride planned for Father's Day week-end but aside from that, should be fine with me.
121 I'm definitely coming up from DC for Joomla! Day NYC. Would also be willing to help; let me know.
122 I was told the you guys have been set in contact with Ryan from the USA West coast event and was wondering if there will be something on the East cost this year.
123 There will definitely be an event in NYC this year, I will personally see to it. Been wanting to do this for a long time.
124 After talking with Chris Justice and others, it makes sense to let the left-coast events happen first, and then leverage what was learned (and created) for the NYC event.
125 Considering how the summers are here - and how deserted the city is - we're much better off shooting for a September timeframe.
126 Sounds good to me ... If I can I will be there!
127 eptember sounds good to me too. If you need anything please let me know.
128 September eh?  Louis - if it works for you let's shoot for that.... I'm thinking the 21st/22nd - friday, then social event/party that night then a couple of sessions saturday afty
129 That sounds really good.
130 Finally, Joomla Day is coming to town!  If I could be of help, just give me a buzz!
131 I am definately in... (sorry for the old post brining up)... All I need is a date, and I'm getting the time off from work...
132 I am definately interested in going to this. Would be especially interested if anyone attending was actually living in southern westchester. I've lived in and out of Manhattan for 10 years but now find myself in southern westchester on the border with the city.
133 I'm NOT interested in splintering any group off or starting anything different. Just ESPECIALLY interested if anyone attending is from southern westchester. 
134 It would be great to pay/barter with anyone who is a joomla expert in my area.
135 Has anyone come up with an idea of a particular day of the week. A weekend would be best i think. 
136 I'm actually in the Bronx, which is actually almost the same thing as southern Westcheste
137 But I was wondering is besides the Joomla!Day there was interst in a Joomla! Users Group in NYC.
138 a users group sounds good. are you north bronx or south bronx?
139 There is a nice place in Midtown-Manthattan a building owned by CitiGroup where the whole lobby is opened to the public as part of some kind of company's deal to the city.
140 The lobby has  chairs and tables- huge place. There are restaurants and food stands too.
141 This place is accessible by trains, buses coming from any part of the boroughs and trains that are accessible for transfer from Metro North trains (out of the city joomler).
142 I am not sure what street this building is located but I know it is around 53rd street and 5th avenue or 3rd avenue.
143 I mentioned this place because this might be a venue for a group meeting. 
144 Again, the information I provided has to be doubled check. I might get back soon if I have some updates. Or for those who are familiar with this Free Place for All, please don't hesitate to share your info. Thanks!
145 Another alternative if the the weather is nice might be Central Park at the Great lawn or wherever you decide that is convenient for everybody--well not everybody but majority of the participants.
146 North. Near the Pelham border.
147 funny, we're about a mile from eachother. i'm near the hutch and lincoln. do you mind if i send you a PM?
148 what do you think about battery park city? there is an atrium with 75 foot palm trees, tables, chairs, there is an outdoor area next to the hudson river with restaurants and a park that stretches all the way south and almost completely north to the bridge.
149 it's a longer haul for me (than 53rd street citibank - which sounds good) but i love it there. peaceful, tranquil, and beautiful. if that is too far downtown for anyone, that is fine with me as i'm out of manhattan in southern westchester.
150 No prob. I'm on City Island.
151 I spent years in the city working down on 22nd street.  Love it down there.  
152 I live up in Poughkeepsie, but I'll definitey make a trek down for this.  Very kewl.  I'll have to keep my eyes peeled.
153 Now that you mentioned about battery park, then I definitely prefer battery park among the others. It is indeed an excellent place.
154 I really just have one other question... is there going to be food?  That's all I need to know 
155 You should get a Joomla! shirt anyway
156 you cracked me up bro! Now that we already figure out shelter (battery park, cGroup Building or Central park) we will make sure that food will also available for all.
157 I should say we should get Joomla shirts and wear them during the meeting? --form of advertisement.
158 I would argue without a Joomla! shirt - no entrance >:-)
159 Excellent idea Alex, we now have our price of admission decided
160 Also, I don't want to be a picnic-pooper but I think this should be inside, so we can see our screens 8) I see this as an all-day affair followed by a good ol' fashioned pub crawl in the evening. That sound good to everyone?
161 Sounds good to me... you can't count on the weather
162 I'm definately in for it... Just let me know the date and I'm there...
163 Ok, perhaps it just me, but we're going to look geeky enough with the matching joomla shirts... but a pub crawl whist we're toting laptops and joomla shirts.. we're going off the chart here into some serious geekdom.
164 The Joomla shirt I got is black, and will be part of a baggy plaid skate shorts ensemble.
165 I'll also be riding one of these most likely, so it will definitely make for a gangly crew of sorts...
166 Eih, let them stare and make fun...  We're the ones making the money (kinda, well not really, but they don't know that)...
167 As long as no one shows up on a segway... I think we'll be ok.
168 I can't believe the last post in this thread was a month ago. What's going on with all of these plans?
169 Any update on the proceedings?
170 I know I've been out of the loop lately... busy with getting my life in order. 
171 I still have to get my shirt!
172 Perhaps we should make a quick list on what we've gotten done / decided at this point and another list of what we still need to accomplish to pull this shindig off.
173 Completely rude side question, is there a Joomla User Group in New York City?  If so, where and when does it meet?
174 I'm over in Astoria.
175 But I've been busy lately and have missed more than I've attended. I believe they are taking a break over the summer as the city is somewhat deserted.
176 This was the only thread I could find on a NYC Joomla Day, and it looks like there is nothing in the works, but that there is some interest.
177 If this is correct, how about starting small with a Joomla Users Group, meet anywhere in the city, and move on from there. I'm not the best organizer, but I bet if we pick a place and a date, people will show up.
178 If you have any information about a Users Group, please let me know. And sorry, although I would love to learn it, PHP is a mystery to me.
179 I think it's just a matter of putting it together and doing it.  Perhaps we can appoint a few people to set everything up.. and people can give a yay or nay.. and go from there.  Even if we get 3 or 4 people.. we can hang out and do something fun.
180 By the way, I think there are plans for an official J! Day NYC in October.
181 I thought it was September... I'm in for whatever (I'm about 45 mins outside of the city)...
182 The last I saw it is October, but the date is not 100% firm. Ryan is organizing it in the same way he did for J! Day west in May.
183 The way things were organized in California were as an "unconference' and people were invited to propose topics.
184 We could always do a pre-J! day get together
185 I think it would be great!
186 Will it be scheduled to coincide with the SFLC Legal Software Freedom Summit October 12? That would be really cool if it were.
187 I think the J! Day will be October 6.
188 I'm such a country boy.  To me 2 digits off could mean miles apart.
189 I'm right off the triborough bridge/second to last stop on the N
190 Interestingly, I tried to see if there was a Meetup for Joomla and Meetup doesn't even have a category for it!
191 As I said before... Just let me know a date and time, and I'm in...
192 A weekend would be better for me... I've got a 1 1/2hr commute down to the island.  I'm pretty familiar once I'm there - worked a block from the flat iron for almost 6 years.
193 Perhaps it would be a good time to talk usergroup as well, since it looks as though there is nothing out there yet. 
194 I know place was sort of up in the air, but that's pretty easy: we can pick someplace conspicuous and go from there.  Perhaps a little zen wandering.
195 First things first... a date.  I was thinking sometime in September.  Would keep it close to J! day and keep things fresh. If we do a Saturday, we have the 1st, 8th, 15th, 22nd and 29th.  Perhaps a poll might be in order?
196 There are a zillion bookstores one could meet at.  Not sure how amenable they are to that sort of thing here, the LUG down in baltimore met and the local Borders.
197 If we actually establish a group which meets regularly, I know a lot of user groups in this area meet over at IBM's main office, there is a pain of a sign in process for security reasons(no drop ins - you have to preconfirm) but I could certainly ask on the LUG list what the process is of getting IBM to donate meeting space is(they have since moved over to Google which now seems to be the preferred meeting place for *UG in NYC)
198 I'm sure some of the larger bookstores might even encourage it.  All depends.  Someone could do some legwork beforehand, or we could just think of a few places and start coming up with a list.
199 I'd love a reason to make some more regular trips down to the city.  I miss spending time there.
200 Once we come up with a date...
201 Sûrement que maintenant ceci est payant parce que j'ai essayée de m'inscrire et c'est payant . C'est très embêtant !
202 Tout le monde s'en fout mais c'est pas gravé, on a parfois besoin de dire des trucs inutiles, alérs vas-y, RTL 
203 Ce matin lors de mon jogging quotidien, je croésai une charmante demoiselle brune aux yeux verts, avec des nibards comme jamais je n'avais vu auparavant. 
204 e topic trolle pour ce défouler avec humour et respect lachez vous  dites n'importe quoi sans vulgariter  amusons nous du rire du rire trollons trollons 
205 l'État ou l'administration, le territoire, les populations sont des propriétés privées (res-privata), c'est une possession par fait naturel et le fait du plus fort. Le pouvoir et la propriété se transmettent par héritage familial.
206 Sa pérennité et son identité sont incarnées par une seule personne, le propriétaire légal du territoire (le roi, la reine), de « droit divin » ; le gouvernement de la res-privata "royale" peut prendre diverses formes, de la monarchie pure (gouvernement d'un seul autocratiquement, ou absolutiste), jusqu'à des formes républicaines avec l'existence d'une démocratie quant à la gestion du bien privé royal (cas des monarchies parlementaires).
207 l'État ou l'administration, le territoire, les populations sa pérennité et son identité sont propriété de Dieu lui-même (chef d'état) comme le Vatican où le pape est assimilable à un premier ministre.
208 Le cas de l'Iran est moins théocratique, mais plus religiocratique par la présence du guide suprême (pouvoir fondamental, chef d'État) devant le pouvoir exécutif (nommé ici présidence). Dans théocratie et religiocratie il peut y avoir une république partielle, gestion du bien divin, et une chose politique et même une démocratie.
209 'État l'administration n'a de sens que dans la propriété d'un peuple ou de population de la gestion souveraine de la res-publica (bien et chose publique).
210 Dans cette conception, la république est le plus souvent associée à l'affirmation (constitutionnelle ou non) d'un bien commun et d'une chose publique, que son gouvernement tente de préserver.
211 Une simple confédération d'intérêts particuliers ne suffit donc pas à fonder une république.
212 Il existe de nombreuses conceptions de la république, et autant de formes concrètes, par exemple les républiques
213 À noter : le concept d'unité et d'indivisibilité de la République est une conception spécifiquement française. Les républiques fédérales n'ont pas nécessairement la même exigence. La laïcité, dont le principe est très loin d'être universellement reconnu, ne peut pas davantage être associée automatiquement à la république.
214 Si le concept est assez large pour inclure des démocraties représentatives, une république n'implique pas forcément une démocratie. 
215 Un État de forme républicaine peut être une démocratie limitée, où certains droits ne sont réservés qu'à un groupe restreint : la république est alors dictatoriale ou totalitaire.
216 Par ailleurs, si la république est associée à la poursuite du bien commun, des régimes politiques d'inspiration libérale, comme la monarchie constitutionnelle anglaise, qui prennent les décisions au nom du bien individuel ou communautaire, ne peuvent pas non plus êtres considérés des régimes républicains dans le sens strict du terme.
217 Il est plus ambigu de traiter le concept de république Islamique. Cette dénomination peut sembler une contradiction dans les termes, et c'est sans doute évident pour l'Iran qui présente, sous bien des aspects, les caractéristiques concrètes d'une théocratie à fonctionnement partiellement démocratique.
218 En revanche, le cas des Maldives est plus clair : il s'agit effectivement d'une république, mais le terme islamique précise que le système judiciaire est régi par la Charia.
219 Le mot grec que traduisait république pour la plupart, est politeia, qui veut dire, la marche des affaires publiques dans un polis ou ville-état.
220 Mais le mot « république » est d'origine romaine et est créé après l'expulsion de Tarquin le Superbe et l'abolition de la Monarchie romaine en -509. Composé à partir de deux mots latin  : le nom féminin « res », qui signifie la « chose », et l'adjectif « publica », que l'on peut traduire par « publique », la res publica, ou « chose publique », désigne dans un premier temps l'organisation publique de la société (comme dans La République de Platon). Mais la paternité du terme « République », au sens moderne, est souvent accordée à Jean Bodin qui la définit dans Les six livres de la République en 1576 comme un « droit [1] gouvernement de plusieurs ménages et de ce qui leur est commun, avec puissance souveraine ».
221 Dans son oeuvre Du contrat social, Jean-Jacques Rousseau définit la république comme « tout État régi par des lois, sous quelque forme d'administration que ce puisse être ; car alors seulement l'intérêt public gouverne, et la chose publique est quelque chose. Tout gouvernement légitime est républicain. »
222 Trois textes classiques ont transmis les sens multiples de ces deux termes aux modernes : La république (Politeia) de Platon, Le politique (Politike) d'Aristote, et De la république (De re publica) de Cicéron.
223 Pour les médiévaux, le livre de Cicéron était reçu en forme de citations de Augustin d'Hippone, la plupart dans La Cité de Dieu (Civitas dei). Ils n'avaient Aristote qu'en latin, traduit de l'arabe, traduit du grec; et Platon qu'en fragments, les deux pleins de termes confusément définis. L'expérience historique des médiévaux était d'un Rome qu'on peut appeler post-républicain, un empire idéal, universel, et monarchique.
224 Donc les Jean de Salisbury, les Thomas d'Aquin ont eu une tendance à définir res publica comme un état réglé, surtout monarchique. Ils écrivaient couramment, par exemple, de la Res Publica Christiana sous la papauté. Dans une même optique, plusieurs courtisans du XVIIIe siècle écrivirent des poèmes où ils louaient la bonne gestion par Louis XIV de la république.
225 Au contraire, dans les villes, émergeantes après le XIIe siècle, on se souvenait mieux des formes de gouvernement de l'ancienne Res publica Romana, et là renaît, vers 1300, la définition de république comme un état sans roi, qu'il soit aristocratique ou démocratique.
226 La culture classique étant généralisée dans la noblesse à l'époque, chaque lettré avait déjà entendu parler de la République romaine qui avait précédé la Rome des empereurs. 
227 Les grands voyageurs connaissaient aussi d'autres exemples comme la république helvétique ou la république de Genève.
228 Dans tous ces régimes, c'étaient des électeurs qui désignaient chaque fois que nécessaire qui prendrait en lieu et place de tous, avec leur délégation, les décisions de la période à venir.
229 Les érudits en histoire savaient que la dynastie des Capétiens était également à une époque arrivée au pouvoir par une élection.
230 Le sens médiéval survivait, notamment dans le livre de Jean Bodin, un soutien des politiques pendant les guerres civiles de calvinistes et catholiques, et des absolutistes plus tard; mais la définition urbaine et humaniste d'un état libre (free-state, stato libero), état populaire, ou état sans roi s'étant trouvé dans Bartolus de Saxoferrato (De regimine civitatis, Perugia, vers 1350), Coluccio Salutati (De tyranno, Florence, 1400) et Leonardo Bruni (Laudatio fiorentinae urbis, 1403-04), apparut chez Machiavel au milieu de son Discours sur Tite-Live (« Discours » no. 16-18, 1513?), gagna deux grands états, les États-Unis des Pays-Bas (1581) et le Commonwealth de l'Angleterre (1649), convainquit David Hume et Montesquieu vers 1750, révolutionna les États anglais de l'Amérique du Nord, et triompha partout dans l'Europe après 1792.
231 Rien ne permet de dire qu'entre une monarchie et une république, l'une soit nécessairement plus démocratique que l'autre, l'élection ou non du chef de l'État ne présage en rien de la nature du régime.
232 Une dictature peut être dénommée république avec un chef d'État « élu » d'un parti unique, et une démocratie peut être dénommée monarchie, avec un chef d'État héréditaire.
233 Les monarques règnent généralement à vie et sont remplacés à leur mort par un parent (on parle dans ce cas de monarchie héréditaire), soit déterminé par eux ou encore soit par des règles préétablies (on parle ici de monarchie constitutionnelle).
234 Beaucoup de monarchies constitutionnelles actuelles sont tout à fait démocratiques, comprenant un parlement élu par le peuple.
235 Les présidents de républiques, au contraire, sont généralement élus pour un mandat limité - de même que leurs successeurs.
236 De nos jours, de nombreuses républiques non démocratiques se disent démocratiques, et nonobstant le contrôle des résultats électoraux maintiennent le rituel d'élire régulièrement leur chef d'État ; dans ces États, de nombreux chefs d'États abandonnent leurs fonctions (par démission ou retraite anticipée) ou y sont forcés (par des moyens constitutionnels) par d'autre membres de l'élite dominante.
237 Il y a cependant des exceptions - chaque nouvel empereur du Saint Empire romain, par exemple, était élu par les principaux princes de l'Empire, bien qu'à travers les siècles la coutume évolua jusqu'à nommer à cette charge les membres successifs d'une même famille.
238 L'histoire de la république remonte aussi loin que l'ancienne Akkad. 
239 La république antique la mieux connue est la République romaine, qui dura de -509 à -44.
240 Dans la république romaine, les principes d'annualité (exercice du pouvoir pour un mandat d'une seule année) et de collégialité (exercice du pouvoir par au moins deux hommes en même temps) étaient couramment observés.
241 À notre époque, le pouvoir exécutif s'incarne généralement dans une seule personne, le président ou un premier ministre, mais quelques exceptions sont constatables comme en Suisse, qui possède un conseil de sept membres à sa tête (appelé le Conseil fédéral) et Saint-Marin, où deux personnes se partagent le pouvoir.
242 Dans ces derniers cas, l'exercice du pouvoir se fait de manière collégiale.
243 Les républiques soviétiques étaient des États membres qui devaient réunir trois critères pour être ainsi nommées :
244 être à la périphérie de l'Union soviétique pour pouvoir profiter de leur droit théorique à faire sécession
245 être économiquement capable d'assurer l'autarcie après la sécession
246 être nommée d'après le groupe ethnique d'au moins un million de personnes qui constituera la majorité de ladite république.
247 Les États des États-Unis se doivent d'être de forme républicaine (tout comme le gouvernement fédéral), le peuple étant le réel détenteur de l'autorité. 
248 Une condition requise pour des États qui sont censés créer et renforcer la plupart des lois domestiques, exception faite pour les zones déléguées au gouvernement fédéral.
249 Les pères fondateurs du pays attendaient une gestion par les États de la majorité des lois domestiques, même si avec le temps l'influence du gouvernement fédéral sur celles-ci s'est peu à peu renforcée.
250 L'obligation d'une forme républicaine était également une façon de protéger les droits des citoyens et d'éviter qu'un état ne sombre dans la dictature ou dans la monarchie.
251 En France, la Première République fit place après la proclamation de l'abolition de la royauté, le 21 septembre 1792. Aujourd'hui, C'est la Cinquième République qui régit les institutions françaises.
252 Actuellement, les républiques sont très nombreuses au niveau mondial. Une forme de gouvernement républicaine peut être combinée avec de très nombreux systèmes économiques et démocratiques différents. Voici quelques exemples pour illustrer différents modèles républicains :
253 la France (au même titre que la Russie et l'Ukraine) est une République gouvernée sous un régime semi-présidentiel, dans lequel l'étendue du pouvoir réel du président dépend de la majorité parlementaire.
254 Si l'Assemblée Nationale est du même bord politique que le président, c'est ce dernier qui gouverne le pays (pouvoir exécutif) ; si ce n'est pas le cas, le président ne conserve que le pouvoir fédératif (politique étrangère et Défense) constitutionnellement attaché à sa fonction ;
255 l'Italie (par exemple) est une république à régime parlementaire, dans lequel le président n'est qu'un « symbole », ne dispose d'aucun pouvoir et ne gouverne pas (c'est le premier ministre qui gouverne) ;
256 le Brésil, ainsi que de nombreux États d'Afrique, sont des républiques gouvernées sous un régime présidentiel, dans lequel le président (généralement élu) détient directement le pouvoir exécutif.
257 la République Populaire de Chine est dirigée sous l'égide d'un parti unique : les pouvoirs législatif , exécutif et fédératif sont détenus par un parti unique, qui contrôle également (quoique indirectement) le pouvoir judiciaire.
258 Même si l'on considéra Sparte comme une république, la monarchie jouait un rôle dans son gouvernement ; et alors qu'on considère aujourd'hui Athènes comme étant une république, elle était décrite dans les temps classiques comme une démocratie.
259 En grec, la distinction entre démocratie et république n'existe pas (le mot république étant, comme dit plus haut, d'origine romaine). Les anciens auteurs grecs décrivaient les régimes non-monarchiques comme oligarchies ou aristocraties (s’ils étaient dirigées par un groupe réduit de citoyens), tyrannies (dirigés par une personne qui s'était emparée du pouvoir par un coup d'État) ou démocraties (si le droit de vote et celui d'être élu était donné à un grand nombre de citoyens, les classes les plus basses incluses).
260 Le terme allemand Freistaat a été introduit dans la langue allemande au XIXe siècle par les puristes linguistiques comme synonyme du mot Republik, d’origine latine (res publica) et venu du français (république). Sa première utilisation remontait à 1731.
261 En français, il est courant que le terme soit traduit littéralement par « État libre ».
262 Sous la république de Weimar, il était utilisé dans le nom officiel dans la plupart des Länder allemands, à l’exception de la Bade (Republik Baden), de la Thuringe, de la Hesse (Volksstaat Hessen), du Wurtemberg (Freier Volksstaat Württemberg), de Lübeck (Freie und Hansestadt Lübeck) de Hambourg (Freie und Hansestadt Hamburg) et de Brême (Freie Hansestadt Bremen). L’adoption du terme « république » souligne la déposition des anciens monarques et l’adoption d’un gouvernement par les élus des citoyens ; l’article 17 de la Constitution disposait que « chaque Land doit avoir une constitution républicaine » (freistaatlich).
263 Le pays entier garde le nom Deutsches Reich ; en tant que forme constitutionnelle, le terme république est utilisé dans sa version venue du français, Republik.
264 Le terme « ville libre », utilisé par les cités-États Lübeck, Brême et Hambourg, et jusqu’à nos jours pour ces deux dernières, est plus ancien et fait référence aux libertés – au sens de privilèges face à l’empire – qu’elles avaient au Moyen Âge en tant que villes libres d’empire.
265 De nos jours, trois des seize Länder utilisent le nom « Freistaat » : la Bavière (Freistaat Bayern), la Saxe (Freistaat Sachsen) et la Thuringe (Freistaat Thüringen). Bien que leur statut juridique soit aujourd'hui le même que celui des autres Länder, ils entendent souligner ainsi leur spécificité politique et une tradition étatique que n'ont pas les anciennes provinces de la Prusse comme la Rhénanie-du-Nord-Westphalie, la Rhénanie-Palatinat ou la Saxe-Anhalt, parfois qualifiés de Bindestrichländer (Länder à traits d'union).
266 L'autarcie est une politique économique qui préconise l'autoproduction par un pays de la plus grande partie de ce qu'il a besoin de consommer, et la réduction des importations au strict minimum. 
267 Un pays vivant en autarcie fonctionne en économie fermée. Inversement, un pays ayant ouvert son activité commerciale à l'étranger a une économie ouverte.
268 L'autarcie a pour but principal de réduire le plus possible les dépenses à l'importation, et ainsi d'établir un équilibre économique à l'intérieur du pays.
269 Historiquement, aucun État n'est parvenu à établir un système parfaitement autarcique, à l'exception du Japon au XVIIe siècle, où le commerce était réduit à un seul port sur une île artificielle (île de Dejima) créé dans la baie de Nagasaki à l'extremité sud-ouest du pays. 
270 La plupart des sociétés ne sont pas auto-suffisantes, et toutes entretiennent nécessairement des échanges avec leurs voisines proches et lointaines :
271 le commerce du sel est le plus ancien et le plus fréquent des commerces. De plus, très rares sont les pays qui disposent sur leur sol de la plupart des matières premières en quantités suffisantes pour subvenir à leurs propres besoins.
272 même l'économie de pays dits en situation d'autarcie par la fermeture de leurs frontières à l'extérieur pour les civils est qualifiée autrement : pour la Corée du Nord, le modèle est l'économie palatine, compte tenu d'échanges de subsistance avec la Chine.
273 Par extention, l'autarcie désigne également un mode de vie dans lequel un foyer produit tout ce qu'il consomme, ou du moins l'essentiel, et ne recourt donc pas ou peu au commerce pour compléter.
274 La consommation est l'acte d'achat et l'utilisation de biens et services, généralement dans le but de satisfaire ses besoins ou ses désirs. Elle est le fait des consommateurs, des entreprises et de l'État.
275 Les phases complémentaires de la consommation sont la production et la distribution.
276 Quantité des biens et services utilisés qui concourent à la satisfaction directe des besoins des agents individuels, les ménages, soit collectivement (consommation des administrations appelée consommation non marchande).
277 Selon la comptabilité nationale, elle correspond à "l'utilisation de biens et services pour la satisfaction directe des besoins humains", à l'exception des achats de logements comptabilisés comme des dépenses d'investissement et la consommation intermédiaire.
278 Selon la comptabilité nationale, la consommation finale totale étudiée au niveau d'un pays réunit:
279 La consommation finale des ménages ou la consommation privée: comprend trois éléments: L'ensemble des dépenses ayant permis l'acquisition de biens et services marchands par les ménages pour satisfaire leurs besoins individuels.
280 L'ensemble des dépenses pour les biens et services relevant de la production pour usage final propre, les services domestiques, les services du logement produits par les propriétaires occupants, l'autoconsommation acquis auprès des producteurs non marchands.
281 Elle correspond à des prestations en nature de biens et services cédés gratuitement ou à des prix non significatifs aux ménages (enseignement, santé, action sociale, des services récréatifs ou culturels).
282 Elle correspond aux transferts sociaux non marchands destinés aux ménages.
283 Lorsque les ménages consomment ce qu'ils produisent eux-mêmes, même partiellement, on parle d'autoconsommation. Ce cas se rencontre notamment dans l'agriculture traditionnelle. 
284 La consommation, exercée en tant que fonction économique par les ménages fait partie du cycle économique général. Le budget des ménages comporte comme ressources
285 On voit donc que la consommation dépend des revenus des consommateurs, mais aussi de leurs comportements vis-à-vis de l'argent. Ceux-ci sont souvent conditionnés par leurs anticipations de revenus futurs et leur confiance générale en l'avenir.
286 L'évolution de la consommation est un élément clé de la conjoncture économique.
287 Il faut tout d'abord admettre le fait que pour consommer, les agents économiques, notamment les ménages, ont besoin d'un revenu.
288 Ainsi, les ménages perçoivent des revenus du travail (salaires nets des cotisations sociales, revenus non salariaux des travailleurs indépendants) et des revenus de la propriété (dividende, intérêts et loyers). La somme constitue le revenu primaire.
289 A ces revenus, il faut ajouter les revenus de transfert (prestations sociales) et déduire les impôts directs. On obtient ainsi le montant total des ressources qui reste à la disposition des ménages afin de consommer ou épargner.
290 Les comportements de consommation des ménages sont déterminés en premier lieu par la décision de partage. Ainsi, leur revenu disponible va se partager entre la consommation et l'épargne.
291 L'analyse keynésienne suppose que la consommation a une importance première dans l'affectation du revenu. Par conséquent, Keynes suppose qu'elle est en fonction du revenu disponible, soit :
292 En comptabilité nationale, l'épargne brute des ménages représente la part du revenu qui "reste disponible pour accumuler les actifs physiques et financiers". Elle constitue le solde du compte d'utilisation du revenu et a deux composantes: L'épargne financière (avoirs liquides, placements) L'épargne non financière (acquisition de logements, achats de biens d'équipement par les entrepreneurs individuels).
293 L'épargne est nette lorsqu'on déduit l'amortissement du capital des entrepreneurs.
294 Cette fonction de consommation keynésienne est remise en cause par les travaux de Milton Friedman publiés en 1957 dans Théorie de la fonction de consommation. Alors que le keynésianisme dominait, il remit en cause cette fonction et en souligna les imperfections.
295 A la place il formula en particulier l'hypothèse de revenu permanent, qui postule que les choix de consommation sont guidés non par les revenus actuels mais par les anticipations que les consommateurs ont de leurs revenus.
296 Ces anticipations étant plus stables, elles ont tendance à lisser la consommation, même quand le revenu disponible baisse ou augmente. Ces travaux furent particulièrement remarqués car ils remettaient en cause la validité des politiques conjoncturelles de relance de la demande et le multiplicateur d'investissement keynésien[1].
297 La sociologie considère la consommation comme un acte essentiel de la vie en société, particulièrement dans le contexte de la société de consommation.
298 Elle étudie la consommation sous un angle éventuellement non financier, étudiant notamment, les motivations de la consommation, les influences, l'usage des biens et services consommés, leur rôle symbolique.
299     * La sociologie s'est ensuite penchée sur le phénomène de la consommation de masse, notamment les déterminants immatériels (la consommation comme facteur d'identité, l'influence de la publicité et des médias).
300 Si la théorie classique postule que consommation et qualité de la vie sont liées, certaines enquêtes relativisent ce postulat. Selon l'enquête Trend Observer 2008 de l'institut Ipsos, six français sur dix sont d'accord avec l'idée que, pour améliorer la qualité de vie, il faut réduire la consommation[2].
301 L'oceano Pacifico, il più grande oceano del mondo, occupa circa un terzo della superficie terrestre, con un'area di 179 milioni di chilometri quadrati.
302 Si estende da nord a sud per circa 15.500 chilometri, partendo e comprendendo il mar di Bering nell'Artico fino ai margini ghiacciati del mare di Ross nell'Antartide. La maggior larghezza in senso est-ovest viene raggiunta a circa 5 gradi di latitudine nord, con una distanza di 19.800 chilometri dall'Indonesia alle coste della Colombia. Il luogo più basso della superficie terrestre si trova nel Pacifico, presso la fossa delle Marianne.
303 Il passaggio tra Pacifico e Indiano segue convenzionalmente una linea che dalla Malesia, passa per Sumatra,Giava, Timor, l'Australia a Capo Londonderry, e Tasmania. Da qui, per il meridiano di Capo South East, il 147°E, raggiunge l'Antartide
304 Il Pacifico contiene circa 25.000 isole (più di quante ce ne siano in tutti gli altri oceani messi insieme), la maggior parte nell'emisfero sud.
305 Lungo i bordi del Pacifico si trovano molti mari. I più grandi sono il mar Cinese orientale, il mar del Giappone, il mare di Sulu, il mar di Tasmania e il mar Giallo. Lo Stretto di Malacca unisce il Pacifico con l'oceano Indiano ad ovest, mentre lo Stretto di Magellano lo unisce con l'oceano Atlantico ad est.
306 L'esploratore portoghese Ferdinando Magellano chiamò questo oceano Pacifico, a causa del mare molto calmo che trovò durante la sua traversata dallo stretto di Magellano fino alle Filippine. 
307 Ma l'oceano non è sempre fedele al suo nome. Molti tifoni ed uragani tormentano le isole del pacifico, e le terre che lo circondano sono piene di vulcani e spesso scosse da terremoti. Gli tsunami, causati da terremoti sottomarini, hanno devastato molte isole e cancellato intere città.
308 Il fondo oceanico del bacino centrale del Pacifico è relativamente uniforme, con una profondità media di 4.270 metri. Le irregolarità più grandi consistono in genere in montagne sottomarine estremamente ripide, con una cima piatta (guyot). 
309 La parte occidentale del fondale oceanico presenta "archi vulcanici" che emergono dalla superficie dell'acqua come raggruppamenti di isole (per es., le isole Salomone, le Hawaii e la Nuova Zelanda), lunghi anche 3.000 km; i rilievi che le compongono si elevano anche per un'altezza di 3.000 m rispetto al fondale oceanico adiacente.
310 Poiché il bacino idrografico del Pacifico è relativamente piccolo, e a causa dell'immensità di questo oceano, la maggior parte dei sedimenti sono di origine autogenica o pelagica. I sedimenti terrigeni, originatisi dall'erosione delle masse terrestri, sono confinati in zone limitate vicine alla terraferma, ove possono però raggiungere spessori notevoli, anche di migliaia di metri.
311 La temperatura dell'acqua nel Pacifico varia da poco più del punto di congelamento nelle zone polari fino a circa 29 °C vicino all'equatore. Anche la salinità varia con la latitudine. l'acqua vicina all'equatore è meno salata di quella alle medie latitudini, a causa delle abbondanti precipitazioni equatoriali durante tutto l'anno.
312 Più a nord delle latitudini temperate la salinità torna a scendere.
313 La circolazione di superficie delle acque del Pacifico si svolge generalmente in senso orario nell'emisfero nord, e in senso antiorario nell'emisfero sud. La Corrente Equatoriale Nord, guidata verso ovest alla latitudine 15° nord dai venti, gira verso nord vicino alle Filippine e parte delle sue acque si muovono a nord con il nome di Corrente Auletiana, mentre il resto ritorna verso sud per riunirsi alla Corrente Equatoriale Nord.
314 La Corrente Aleutiana si divide quando raggiunge il Nordamerica e forma la base della circolazione in senso antiorario nel mare di Bering. 
315 Il suo braccio meridionale diventa la Corrente della California, che si muove lentamente verso sud.
316 La Corrente Equatoriale Sud, scorrendo verso ovest lungo l'equatore, si sposta verso sud ad est della Nuova Guinea, gira ad est alla latitudine di 50 gradi sud, e si unisce alle correnti principali del Pacifico del Sud, 
317 tra cui la Corrente Circumpolare Antartica che compie l'intero giro del globo. Quando si avvicina alle coste cileni, la Corrente Equatoriale Sud si divide: un ramo sorpassa il Capo Horn e finisce nell'Atlantico, mentre l'altro gira a nord per formare la Corrente del Perù (o di Humboldt).
318 Solo le zone più interne delle masse terrestri dell'Australia, della Nuova Guinea e della Nuova Zelanda evitano l'influenza climatica del Pacifico. Esistono cinque differenti regioni climatiche: la zona ovest, the trades, la regione dei monsoni, la regione dei tifoni, e the doldrums.
319 A latitudini intermedie, sia a nord che a sud, flussi d'aria che si spostano verso ovest portano grandi variazioni stagionali di temperatura. Più vicino all'equatore, dove si trovano la maggior parte delle isole, venti stabili permettono di avere temperature relativamente costanti tutto l'anno, tra 21 e 27 gradi Celsius.
320 La regione dei monsoni si trova nel Pacifico occidentale, tra il Giappone e l'Australia. Le caratteristiche di questa regione climatica sono venti che soffiano dall'interno del continente verso l'oceano in inverno, e in direzione opposta d'estate. A causa di questo comportamento, la copertura nuvolosa e le precipitazioni sono molto influenzate dalla stagione.
321 I tifoni causano spesso estesi danni nelle parti occidentali e sudoccidentali del Pacifico. Anche se meno definite rispetto alle altre, due grandi aree di bonaccia si estendono nell'oceano, una al largo delle coste occidentali dell'America Centrale, e l'altra nelle acque equatoriali del Pacifico occidentale.
322 La Linea dell'Andesite è la principale caratteristica geologica del Pacifico. Separa le rocce profonde ed ignee del Bacino del Pacifico Centrale, per lo più basiche, dalle zone continentali parzialmente sommerse composte da rocce ignee acide.
323 La Linea dell'Andesite segue il bordo occidentale delle isole al largo della California e passa a sud delle isole Aleutine, lungo il bordo est della penisola della Kamčatka, le isole Kurili, il Giappone, le isole Marianne, le isole Solomon, e la Nuova Zelanda.
324 La discontinuità prosegue di profonde fosse, come la fossa delle Marianne e la Fossa delle Filippine. La maggior parte delle fosse profonde si trova accanto ai margini della larga piattaforma continentale del Pacifico occidentale.
325 Lungo il margine orientale del bacino del Pacifico si trova il Rialzo Est del Pacifico, che è parte del sistema mondiale di dorsali sottomarine. In direzione nordest lungo il bordo occidentale della Cordigliera degli Albatros dal Sudamerica al Messico, ritornando alle isole al largo della California.
326 Tutte le estensioni orientali dei continenti dell'Asia e dell'Australia si l'trovano fuori dalla Linea dell'Andesite.
327 Lungo l'anello chiuso della Linea dell'Andesite si trovano la maggior parte delle fosse profonde, delle montagne vulcaniche sottomarine, e delle isole oceaniche vulcaniche che caratterizzano il Bacino del Pacifico Centrale.
328 È qui che le lave basaltiche scorrono lentamente dalle fratture per formare enormi montagne vulcaniche a forma di cupola, la cui sommità erosa forma isole in archi, catene e gruppi.
329 Fuori dalla Linea dell'Andesite, i fenomeni vulcanici sono invece di tipo esplosivo, e il cosiddetto cerchio di fuoco ha la maggior concentrazione mondiale di vulcani esplosivi.
330 L'estensione più grande di terra all'interno dell'oceano Pacifico è il continente australiano, che ha un'area leggermente più piccola di quella dell'Europa. Ad una distanza di 3.200 chilometri, in direzione sudest, si trova il grande gruppo di isole della Nuova Zelanda.
331 Quasi tutte le altre isole del Pacifico si trovano tra 30 gradi di latitudine nord e 30 di latitudine sud, dall'Asia sudorientale all'isola di Pasqua. Il resto del Bacino del Pacifico non contiene in pratica terraferma.
332 Il grande triangolo della Polinesia, che unisce le Hawaii, l'isola di Pasqua e la Nuova Zelanda, contiene al suo interno i gruppi delle Marchesi, le Samoa, Tonga. A nord dell'equatore e ad ovest della linea di cambio di data si trovano le numerose piccole isole della Micronesia, incluse le Kiribati, le isole Caroline, le isole Marshall, e le isole Marianne. 
333 Nell'angolo sudovest del Pacifico si trovano le isole della Melanesia, dominate dalla Nuova Guinea. Altri gruppi importanti nella Melanesia includono le isole Bismarck, le Figi, la Nuova Caledonia, le isole Salomone e Vanuatu. 
334 Questa suddivisione in Polinesia, Micronesia e Melanesia, vecchia del 1831 (Jules Dumont d'Urville), non corrisponde alle realtà bio-geografiche: le due zone ora riconosciute dagli scienziati sono l'Oceania vicina e l'Oceania lontana, zone che corrispondono a realtà diverse dal punta di vista botanico, zoologico e anche umano e culturale.
335 Le isole del Pacifico sono di quattro tipi fondamentali: isole continentali, isole alte, barriere coralline, e piattaforme coralline rialzate. Le isole continentali si trovano fuori dalla Linea dell'Andesite e includono la Nuova Guinea, le isole della Nuova Zelanda e le Filippine. Queste isole sono fisicamente associate con i continenti vicini. Le isole alte sono di origine vulcanica, e possono contenere dei vulcani attivi. Tra queste le Hawaii e le isole Solomon.
336 Gli altri due tipi di isole sono il risultato del lavoro dei coralli. Le barriere coralline sono strutture subacquee che sono state costruite dai coralli sopra la lava basaltica sotto la superficie dell'oceano.
337 Una delle più grandi è la Grande Barriera Corallina, al largo dell'Australia nordorientale. Un secondo tipo è quello di una piattaforma corallina rialzata, che è in genere un po' più grande. Ne sono esempi Banaba e Makatea nel gruppo di Tuamotu nella Polinesia Francese.
338 In tempi preistorici vi furono importanti migrazioni umane nel Pacifico, prima tra tutte quella dei Polinesiani da Tahiti fino alle Hawaii e la Nuova Zelanda. L'oceano fu visto per la prima volta dagli Europei all'inizio del XVI secolo, prima da Vasco Nunez de Balboa (1513) e poi da Ferdinando Magellano, che attraversò il Pacifico durante la sua circumnavigazione (1519-22).
339 Per il resto del XVI secolo, l'esplorazione fu condotta principalmente dalla Spagna, con navi che raggiungevano le Filippine, la Nuova Guinea e le isole Solomon. Durante il XVII secolo la scena fu dominata dagli olandesi; Abel Janszoon Tasman scoprì nel 1642 la Tasmania e la Nuova Zelanda. Il XVIII secolo vide l'esplorazione russa in Alaska e nelle isole Aleutine, i francesi in Polinesia, e gli inglesi con tre viaggi del capitano James Cook.
340 L'imperialismo crescente del XIX secolo risultò nell'occupazione della maggior parte del Pacifico da parte delle potenze occidentali. La nave esploratrice HMS Beagle portò importanti contributi scientifici negli anni 1830, con a bordo Charles Darwin. Un'altra nave famosa fu la HMS Challenger. Anche se gli Stati Uniti presero le Filippine nel 1898, arrivati al 1914 il Giappone controllava la maggior parte del Pacifico occidentale, ed occupò molte altre isole durante la Seconda guerra mondiale. Alla fine della guerra, l'oceano era dominato dalla marina militare americana.
341 Il pacifico comprende diciassette stati indipendenti: Australia, Fiji, Giappone, Kiribati, le isole Marshall, Micronesia, Nauru, Nuova Zelanda, Palau, Papua Nuova Guinea, Filippine, Samoa, le isole Salomone, Taiwan (disputata dalla Repubblica Cinese), Tonga, Tuvalu e Vanuatu. Undici di queste nazioni sono totalmente indipendenti solo dal 1960. Le isole Marianne del Nord hanno un proprio governo, ma dipendono dagli Stati Uniti per la politica estera, e le isole Cook e Niue hanno una relazione simile con la Nuova Zelanda. Inoltre nel Pacifico si trova lo Stato americano delle Hawaii e numerosi territori e possessioni di Australia, Cile, Francia, Giappone, Nuova Zelanda, Gran Bretagna e Stati Uniti.
342 Lo sfruttamento delle risorse minerarie del Pacifico è ostacolato dalle grandi profondità dell'oceano. Nelle acque basse al largo delle coste australiane e neozelandesi, vengono estratti gas naturale e petrolio, mentre le perle vengono raccolte o coltivate lungo le coste di Australia, Giappone, Nuova Guinea, Nicaragua, Panama e Filippine, anche se si tratta di un'industria in declino.
343 La risorsa maggiore del Pacifico sono i suoi pesci. Le acque costiere dei continenti e delle isole più temperate forniscono salmone, sardine, pesce spada e tonno, più numerosi crostacei. Nel 1986, le nazioni che fanno parte del Forum del Sud Pacifico hanno dichiarato l'area libera dal nucleare, nel tentativo di fermare gli esperimenti nucleari e di prevenire lo stoccaggio delle scorie nucleari nel pacifico.
344 Il monsone è un vento ciclico, caldo, tipico dell'Oceano Indiano, che ne influenza profondamente il clima. Nelle aree caratterizzate dalla presenza di questi venti, dal subcontinente indiano fino al sud del Giappone, esistono principalmente due stagioni:
345 La stagione secca, durante i mesi invernali (Ottobre-Maggio) nell'emisfero boreale, in cui l'enorme differenza termica fra il continente asiatico, più freddo, e l'Oceano Indiano, più caldo, origina il monsone il quale, in questo caso, spira dalle montagne indiane al mare, causando un clima decisamente arido.
346 La stagione delle piogge, durante l'estate (Maggio-Ottobre) boreale, in cui il meccanismo è opposto al precedente; stavolta è il continente asiatico ad essere decisamente più caldo dell'oceano indiano e in tal caso il monsone spira dal mare verso l'entroterra portando con sé aria satura di umidità e favorendo lo sviluppo di intense precipitazioni.
347 I monsoni, come altri venti periodici, si generano a causa delle differenze di pressione che si determinano tra due zone opposte (mare-costa, cima-valle)che sono sottoposte all'irraggiamento.
348 Le due zone che assorbono la stessa quantità di energia subiscono variazioni di temperatura diverse per cui la zona dove la temperatura aumenta maggiormente avrà bassa pressione e dove la temperatura aumenta in misura minore avrà alta pressione.
349 Quando l'irraggiamento diminuisce,la zona dove la temperatura era aumentata maggiormente sarà quella che subirà un maggior calo di temperatura. Viceversa accade nell'altra zona. Il risultato barico è che dove avevamo alta pressione ora c'è bassa pressione e dove la pressione era bassa, ora è alta..
350 La Terra è il pianeta su cui vive l'umanità, il terzo in ordine di distanza dal Sole. È il più grande dei pianeti terrestri del sistema solare, sia per quanto riguarda la massa sia per il diametro, ed è l'unico corpo planetario del sistema solare adatto a sostenere la vita, almeno tra quelli conosciuti alla scienza moderna (anche se vi sono ipotesi e in alcuni casi anche deboli indizi a sostegno della tesi per cui la vita, probabilmente in forma microscopica, sarebbe stata presente o potrebbe tuttora sussistere su alcuni corpi del sistema solare come Marte, Venere e alcuni satelliti naturali dei pianeti gassosi [1]).
351 È il primo pianeta conosciuto a possedere acqua in forma liquida sulla sua superficie ed il solo nell'Universo noto per la presenza di vita.
352 Possiede un campo magnetico, che, insieme ad una atmosfera composta in prevalenza da azoto ed ossigeno, la protegge dalle radiazioni nocive alla vita; l'atmosfera inoltre funziona come scudo contro le piccole meteore, causandone la distruzione per calore da attrito prima del raggiungimento della superficie.
353 La formazione della Terra è datata circa 4,57 miliardi di anni e possiede un solo satellite naturale, la Luna, la cui età di formazione, datata su alcuni campioni delle rocce più antiche, è risultata compresa tra 4.29 e 4,56 miliardi di anni fa.
354 Il suo asse di rotazione è inclinato rispetto alla perpendicolare al piano dell'eclittica: questa inclinazione, combinata con la rivoluzione della Terra intorno al Sole, è causa dell'alternarsi delle stagioni.
355 Le condizioni atmosferiche primordiali sono state alterate in maniera preponderante dalla presenza di forme di vita, le quali hanno creato un diverso equilibrio ecologico, plasmando la superficie del pianeta. 
356 Circa il 71% della superficie è coperta da oceani ad acqua salata, mentre il restante 29% è rappresentato dai continenti e dalle isole.
357 La superficie esterna è suddivisa in diversi segmenti rigidi, o placche tettoniche, che si spostano lungo la superficie in periodi di diversi milioni di anni.
358 La parte interna, attiva dal punto di vista geologico, è composta da un sottile strato relativamente solido o plastico, denominato mantello, e da un nucleo, diviso a sua volta in nucleo esterno, dove si genera il campo magnetico, ed un nucleo interno solido, costituito principalmente da ferro e nichel.
359 Importanti sono le influenze esercitate sulla Terra dallo spazio esterno; infatti la Luna è all'origine del fenomeno delle maree, stabilizza lo spostamento dell'asse terrestre ed ha lentamente modificato la lunghezza del periodo di rotazione del pianeta (rallentandolo); un bombardamento di comete durante le fasi primordiali ha giocato un ruolo fondamentale nella formazione degli oceani e, in un periodo successivo, alcuni impatti di asteroidi hanno provocato significativi cambiamenti delle caratteristiche della superficie e ne hanno alterato la vita presente.
360 Il simbolo astronomico della Terra è un cerchio con all'interno una croce (Unicode: U+2641; esadecimale: ): la linea orizzontale rappresenta l'equatore, mentre quella verticale un meridiano (, occasionalmente anche ).
361 Gli scienziati sono riusciti a ricostruire la storia della Terra. La Terra e gli altri pianeti del sistema solare si formarono 4,57 miliardi di anni fa[3]. Inizialmente liquefatto il pianeta andò a raffreddarsi, formando una crosta terrestre sempre più di tipo granitica, simile all'odierna.
362 La Luna, si formò subito dopo, probabilmente a causa dell'impatto tra la Terra e un pianetino grande quanto Marte e avente circa il 10% della massa della Terra,[4] conosciuto come Theia.[5] 
363 Nell'urto tra i due corpi, un po' della massa di questo piccolo corpo celeste si unì alla Terra ed una porzione fu espulsa nello spazio, ma abbastanza materiale sopravvisse per formare un satellite orbitante.
364 L'attività vulcanica, decisamente maggiore dell'odierna, produsse l'atmosfera primordiale, molto ricca di biossido di carbonio. Il vapore acqueo condensandosi produsse gli oceani.[6] Circa 3,5 miliardi di anni fa nacque la prima forma di vita.[7]
365 Lo sviluppo della fotosintesi permise ad alcune forme di vita di assorbire l'energia solare; l'ossigeno, prodotto di scarto della fotosintesi, si accumulò nell'atmosfera e creò uno strato di ozono (una forma di ossigeno molecolare [O3]) nell'atmosfera superiore. 
366 L'incorporazione di cellule più piccole in altre di dimensioni maggiori fece si che si svilupparono cellule più complesse delle cellule procarioti, chiamate eucarioti.[8] Protette dallo strato di ozono che impediva ai raggi ultravioletti, dannosi per la vita, di attraversare l'atmosfera le varie forme di vita colonizzarono la superficie della Terra.[9]
367 La primordiale struttura geologica di microplacche continentali andò verso una primaria aggregazione, formando dei continenti che occasionalmente si univano per formare un supercontinente. 
368 Circa 750 milioni di anni fa (mya), il primo supercontinente conosciuto (la Rodinia) cominciò a dividersi in continenti più piccoli. I continenti in seguito si riunirono per formare la Pannotia, 600 – 540 mya, e finalmente la Pangea, che si divise in continenti più piccoli circa 180 milioni di anni fa[10] ponendo le basi per la situazione geografica moderna.
369 Dal 1960 si è ipotizzato che diverse ere glaciali tra i 750 ed i 580 milioni di anni fa, durante il Neoproterozoico, abbiano coperto di ghiaccio la maggior parte del pianeta. Questa ipotesi (non ancora accettata dall'intera comunità scientifica) è conosciuta con il nome di Terra a palla di neve, e deve il particolare interesse al fatto che precede l'esplosione del Cambriano, dove le forme di vita multicellulari cominciarono a proliferare.[11]
370 Successivamente al Cambriano, circa 530 milioni di anni fa, si sono succedute cinque estinzioni di massa.[12] L'ultima di esse, avvenuta 65 milioni di anni fa, probabilmente causata da una collisione meteoritica provocò, l'estinzione dei dinosauri e di altri animali, tra cui le ammoniti, ma risparmiò alcuni piccoli animali, come i mammiferi, che presero il sopravvento nel periodo successivo. 
371 In seguito i mammiferi si diversificarono, finché un animale africano, assomigliante ad una scimmia, guadagnò l'abilità di mantenere una posizione eretta.[13] Questa evoluzione permise l'utilizzo di utensili, incoraggiò la comunicazione al fine di provvedere ad una migliore nutrizione e creò i presupposti per lo sviluppo di una maggiore area cerebrale.
372 Lo sviluppo della agricoltura, e della civiltà, permise agli esseri umani di plasmare la Terra in un tempo così breve come nessuna altra forma di vita era riuscita a fare,[14] influenzando sia la natura, sia la quantità delle altre forme di vita.
373 La fase recente delle ere glaciali incominciò circa 40 milioni di anni fa, intensificandosi durante il Pleistocene, circa 3 milioni di anni fa. Le regioni polari sono state sottoposte a svariati cicli di glaciazioni e disgeli, succedutisi ogni 40-100 000 anni.
374 L'ultima di queste fasi termino 10 000 anni fa, lasciando il pianeta in una situazione morfo-climatica abbastanza stabile fino ai giorni nostri.[15]
375 Modelli chimici basati sull'attuale abbondanza di isotopi radioattivi con lunghissimi tempi di decadimento e l'analisi composizionale di materiale non differenziato proveniente da meteoriti e dalla Luna datano la formazione della Terra a 4,65 miliardi di anni fa. La difficoltà principale nella determinazione dell'età della Terra è legata al fatto che nessuna roccia attualmente affiorante sul pianeta presenta questa età;
376 ciò è dovuto alla natura fluida o plastica della totalità della crosta terreste durante il primo miliardo di anni circa. Inoltre processi di differenziazione magmatica separavano in questa prima fase i vari elementi concentrandone solo alcuni all'interno della crosta terrestre.
377 Questo frazionamento rende difficile stabilire con esattezza il contenuto iniziale di alcuni geocronometri e pertanto non è possibile calcolare con esattezza le abbondanze iniziali.
378 Le rocce più antiche rinvenibili sul pianeta sono rocce continentali, si ritrovano nei cratoni e hanno un'età pari a 4,1 miliardi di anni. La maggior parte della crosta oceanica è più giovane, perché continuamente riciclata dai meccanismi legati alla tettonica delle placche: le rocce più antiche in questo tipo di crosta sono giurassiche e hanno un'età di 100 milioni di anni.
379 L'età della Terra fu determinata da Clair Patterson nel 1953, utilizzando metodi radiometrici legati al decadimento dell'uranio.[16]
380 La Terra è il maggiore sia per dimensione che per massa dei quattro pianeti terrestri (insieme a Mercurio, Marte e Venere), composto per lo più da roccia e silicati; tale termine è contrapposto ai giganti gassosi, pianeti appartenenti al sistema solare esterno. Sempre tra i pianeti terrestri è quello con la maggiore densità, la più alta gravità e il più forte campo magnetico. [17]
381 La forma della Terra viene correttamente definita come geoide, ma è decisamente simile ad uno sferoide oblato (solido di rotazione che si ottiene dalla rotazione di un'ellisse attorno al proprio asse minore), da cui si discosta per un massimo di 100 metri.
382 Il diametro medio dello sferoide di riferimento è circa 12 742 km, tuttavia, in maniera più approssimativa si può definire come 40 009 km/π, dato che il metro è stato originariamente definito come 1/10 000 000 della distanza tra l'equatore e il polo nord passando per Parigi, Francia. [18]
383 La rotazione della Terra è la causa del rigonfiamento equatoriale, che comporta un diametro equatoriale di 43 km maggiore di quello polare. [19] Le maggiori deviazioni locali sulla superficie sono: il Monte Everest, con 8850 m (sopra il locale livello del mare) e la Fossa delle Marianne, con 10 924 m (sotto il locale livello marino). 
384 Se si paragona la Terra ad un perfetto ellissoide, essa ha una tolleranza di circa una parte su 584, o di 0,17%, che è minore dello 0,22% di tolleranza ammesso nelle palle da biliardo. [20] A causa della presenza del rigonfiamento, inoltre, il luogo maggiormente distante dal centro della Terra è situato attualmente sul Monte Chimborazo in Ecuador. [21]
385 Grazie allo studio dei sismogrammi si è giunti a considerare l'interno della terra suddiviso in una serie di gusci; difatti si è notato che le onde sismiche subiscono fenomeni di rifrazione nell'attraversare il pianeta. 
386 La rifrazione consiste nella modifica della velocità e della traiettoria di un'onda quando questa si trasmette ad un mezzo con differente densità. Si sono potute così rilevare superfici in profondità in cui si verifica una brusca accelerazione e deviazione delle onde, e in base a queste sono state identificate quattro zone sferiche concentriche: la crosta, il mantello, il nucleo esterno e il nucleo interno.
387 L'interno della Terra, come quello degli altri pianeti terrestri, è diviso chimicamente in una crosta formata da rocce da basiche ad acide, un mantello ultrabasico e un nucleo terrestre composto principalmente da ferro. 
388 Il pianeta è abbastanza grande da avere un nucleo differenziato in un nucleo interno solido e un nucleo esterno liquido, che produce un debole campo magnetico a causa della convezione del suo materiale elettricamente conduttivo.
389 Dal punto di vista delle proprietà meccaniche, la crosta e la porzione superiore del mantello formano la litosfera, rigida; mentre una porzione intermedia del mantello, che si comporta in un certo senso come un fluido enormemente viscoso, costituisce l'astenosfera.
390 Materiale proveniente dall'astenosfera si riversa continuamente in superficie attraverso vulcani e dorsali oceaniche non conservando però la composizione originale perché soggetto a cristallizzazione frazionata.
391 Lo schema seguente riassume le profondità, la caratteristica principale per la definizione dei vari gusci che compongono la Terra e la loro densità:
392 Il geochimico F. W. Clarke ha calcolato che poco più del 47% della crosta terrestre è composta da ossigeno. I costituenti più comuni sono rappresentati dagli ossidi; cloro, zolfo e fluoro sono le uniche importanti eccezioni, sebbene la loro presenza totale nelle rocce sia inferiore all'1%. 
393 Gli ossidi principali sono i silicati, gli ossidi di alluminio, di ferro, di calcio, magnesio, potassio e di sodio. I silicati sono la componente acida della crosta terrestre, andando a rappresentare e costituire tutti i principali minerali delle rocce intrusive. 
394 Analizzando 1672 campioni di tutti i tipi di rocce, Clarke ha dedotto che il 99,22% di esse erano composte da solo 11 ossidi (vedi tabella a destra), mentre i rimanenti costituenti erano presenti solo in quantità veramente ridotte. [23]
395 La temperatura all'interno della Terra aumenta con un gradiente geotermico di circa 25 °C/km nella crosta, per poi diminuire a 0.7 °C-0.8 °C/km nelle altre zone; è direttamente collegata alla pressione.
396 Raggiunge i 5270 K (circa 5000 °C) ed una pressione di 3600 kbar nella porzione di nucleo interno. Il calore interno è stato generato in parte durante la formazione del pianeta e da allora ulteriore calore è stato continuamente generato dal decadimento radioattivo di isotopi dell'uranio, del torio e del potassio.
397 Il calore trasmesso dall'interno all'esterno del pianeta deriva dai moti convettivi del mantello, anche se, essendo le rocce cattive conduttrici termiche, rappresenta solo un ventimillesimo dell'energia che il pianeta riceve dal Sole.
398 La densità media della Terra è di 5,515 g/cm³, rendendolo il pianeta più denso del Sistema Solare; tuttavia non è costante, ma è direttamente proporzionale all'aumentare della profondità. Nella crosta terrestre passa da 2,2 a 2,9 g/cm³, per aumentare progressivamente nel mantello, con una densità da 3,4 a 5,6 g/cm³, e giungere nel nucleo a valori compresi tra i 9 e i 13 g/cm³.
399 In accordo con la teoria della tettonica a zolle, che è oramai accettata dalla quasi totalità degli esperti in Scienze della Terra, la zona più esterna della Terra è suddivisa in due parti: la litosfera, comprendente la crosta terrestre e la parte più superficiale del mantello superiore, e l'astenosfera che forma la parte più interna e profonda del mantello. 
400 L'astenosfera si comporta come un liquido sovrariscaldato che fa muovere le placce litosferiche, ed è estremamente viscoso.[24] La litosfera sostanzialmente galleggia sulla astenosfera ed è suddivisa in quelle che comunemente sono chiamate placche tettoniche.
401 Ein Balanceakt mit deutlichen Worten 15. Januar 2010 Dass auch die neue Bundesregierung einen großen Wert auf den Ausbau der deutsch-chinesischen Beziehungen lege, hat Guido Westerwelle gleich zu Beginn seines Statements nach den ersten Gesprächen in Peking deutlich gemacht. Und zum Beleg führte er im Beisein von Yang Jiechi, des chinesischen Außenministers, aus, „rasch“ nach seinem eigenen Amtsantritt als Bundesaußenminister nach China gereist zu sein. Wirtschaftlich, politisch und auch persönlich sollten die Beziehungen erweitert werden, sagte er, und er nannte einen weiteren Beleg dafür, es könne gelingen.
402 Westerwelle: Verhältnis zu China „auf gutem Weg“ Trotz deutlicher Differenzen über die Achtung der Menschenrechte sieht Außenminister Guido Westerwelle die Beziehungen zu China „auf gutem Wege“. Das Verhältnis sei „ausbaufähig“, was auch für die wirtschaftlichen und kulturellen Beziehungen gelte.
406 Westerwelle mahnt Menschenrechte an Für diplomatische Verhältnisse überraschend deutlich hat Deutschlands Chefdiplomat in China heikle Themen angesprochen. Außenminister Guido Westerwelle mahnte bei seinem Antrittsbesuch in Peking die Einhaltung der Menschenrechte an. Der FDP-Chef wies auch auf die Attacken gegen den Internetanbieter Google hin.
407 Women know traffic safety Women know traffic safety If men behaved like women in traffic, considerably less people would die out there, says Liikenneturva Communications Manager Kare Ojaniemi. Women are less likely to speed or drive drunk  and they even rememb er to buckle up. The statistics concerning the fatal accidents investigated by the traffic accident investigation teams during 2005-2007 draws an unflattering picture of the way men conduct themselves behind the wheel. If the accident  involves alcohol, speeding or failure to use a seatbelt, the driver is typically a male. Men cause almost ten times as many DUI relat